Deploy an ADK agent to Agent Runtime using Agents CLI
About this codelab
subjectLast updated Jun 18, 2026
account_circleWritten by Toni Klopfenstein
1. Overview
This lab is part of Kaggle's 5-Day AI Agents: Intensive Vibe Coding Course with Google.
You can find the additional codelabs and resources available on the event site.
In this codelab, you transition an ADK 2.0 agent from a local development environment into a
production-grade deployment. You will use agents-cli to package, verify, and host your
graph-based workflow live on Agent Runtime on Google Cloud.
To explore this deployment process, you will build a local prototype of the Ambient Expense
Agent from scratch before deploying it to the cloud. (For a deeper dive into designing this
agent's core logic, see the foundational codelabs on the Kaggle event site). The Ambient Expense
Agent streamlines employee expense reporting by instantly approving standard claims while
flagging larger expenses for human-in-the-loop review. Under the hood, it uses an ADK 2.0
graph-based workflow to coordinate these automated approvals and risk analysis steps.
What you'll learn
• • How to prepare your local Ambient Expense Agent project for cloud
hosting.
• • How to scaffold the necessary deployment descriptors and production
wrappers.
• • How to perform dry-runs and deploy your code directly to Agent
Runtime.
• • How to monitor your production agent's execution traces using Cloud
Trace.
What you'll need
• • An active Google Cloud project with billing enabled.
• • The gcloud SDK installed and authenticated.
• • The uv package manager installed.
• • Google Antigravity IDE installed.
Prerequisites
This codelab assumes you are comfortable with:
• • Navigating your system using a terminal.
• • Basic Python development concepts.
• • Fundamental Google Cloud concepts.
2. Set up your Google Cloud Environment
Before deploying, you must configure your Google Cloud project and enable the necessary APIs.
👉 Prompt Antigravity:
Help me set up my Google Cloud environment. Connect to my
project
`YOUR_PROJECT_ID` in the global region, authenticate, and
enable the necessary
generative platform APIs (aiplatform.googleapis.com,
cloudtrace.googleapis.com,
cloudbuild.googleapis.com, agentregistry.googleapis.com).
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it will propose and run the necessary gcloud terminal
commands to configure your project and enable the services. During the authentication step,
Antigravity will display an authorization URL in the terminal. Click the link to sign in via your
web browser and grant access. Once you complete the browser sign-in, Antigravity will resume
execution to set your project environment variables and enable the required APIs.
Note: If this is a new project, gcloud may prompt you to enable the Service Usage API first.
Follow the link provided in the terminal to enable it in the Cloud console if requested.
3. Set up Agents CLI & ADK Skills
For Antigravity to build and deploy ADK agents well, it needs the ADK skill set. These are
bundled references for the ADK API, project scaffolding, the agents-cli deployment
workflow, and evaluation. Installing the agents-cli toolchain also installs these skills into
your coding agent, equipping it to manage your agent's full lifecycle from local scaffolding to
cloud deployment.
👉 Copy-paste the following prompt to Antigravity:
Install the agents-cli toolchain and its ADK skills so you
can help me build
an ADK agent. Run "uvx google-agents-cli setup", then
confirm with
"agents-cli info" and tell me which skills are now
available.
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it runs uvx google-agents-cli setup in
the terminal to install the CLI and its companion skills. It then runs agents-cli info to
verify the installation and lists the newly installed domain skills (such as google-agents-
cli-deploy and google-agents-cli-workflow) directly in the chat.
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it runs uvx google-agents-cli setup in
the terminal to install the CLI and its companion skills. It then runs agents-cli info to
verify the installation and lists the newly installed domain skills (such as google-agents-
cli-deploy and google-agents-cli-workflow) directly in the chat.
Note for Antigravity users: During this codelab, Antigravity may generate implementation
plans or display popups before executing commands or writing code. Be sure to review and
approve these plans or popups to allow Antigravity to proceed with the tasks.
Quota Tip: If you run out of quota during testing or development, switch the model in
Antigravity to another available model.
4. Create your agent project
With your cloud environment configured and your CLI skills installed, you are ready to generate
the local codebase for your agent. In this step, you use Antigravity to scaffold a fully functional
Ambient Expense Agent prototype compatible with ADK 2.0.
Note for Kaggle 5 days of AI Agents Users: If you successfully completed this Vibecode
Ambient Expense Agent Codelab for Day 4 and prefer to deploy your existing custom agent
codebase, you can skip this scaffolding step and go to the next step.
👉 Prompt Antigravity:
Use Agents CLI to build a local prototype for an ambient
expense agent that
streamlines employee expense reporting by instantly
approving standard claims
while flagging larger expenses for review. Ensure the graph
workflow is
compatible with ADK 2.0 and includes an `auto_approve` node
that automatically
approves expenses under $100, and a `review_agent` node
that triggers a
human-in-the-loop pause (`RequestInput`) for expenses of
$100 or more.
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it leverages the newly installed scaffolding skills to run
agents-cli scaffold create expense-agent --adk in the terminal. It will
then verify and adjust the generated prototype code to ensure your expense-agent correctly
implements the $100 auto-approval threshold and human-in-the-loop review flow within its
Agent Development Kit (ADK) graph workflow.
5. Prepare for Production Deployment
5. Prepare for Production Deployment
Agent Runtime is a fully managed Google Cloud service that lets you deploy, manage, and scale
AI agents in production. Agent Runtime handles the operational complexities of hosting, offering
a stateful environment with features like session management, long-term memory, and secure
code execution sandboxes.
Why Deploy to Agent Runtime?
When building agents locally with Antigravity, your agent runs on your local machine against
localhost. While great for rapid prototyping, local agents stop running the moment you
close your laptop.
Deploying your agent to Agent Runtime moves your workflow into a fully managed, always-on
Google Cloud environment. This establishes a secure, live backend endpoint that remains active
24/7. In the next codelab, you will build a web frontend that connects directly to this cloud
endpoint, giving your agent a public URL.
Furthermore, Agent Runtime provides dedicated infrastructure optimized specifically for AI
agents—offering built-in capabilities such as:
• • Managed Stateful Execution: Built-in session management and long-
term memory persistence across conversational turns.
• • Secure Sandboxing: Safely executes dynamic tool calls and agent-
generated code in isolated environments.
• • Enterprise Observability: Out-of-the-box telemetry streaming directly to
Cloud Trace and Cloud Logging.
To host your agent on Agent Runtime, you must enhance your local project directory with
production descriptors, schemas, and endpoint wrappers.
👉 Prompt Antigravity:
Scaffold the production deployment files for Agent Runtime.
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it runs agents-cli scaffold enhance --
deployment-target agent_runtime --yes in your project root. This command
scans your directory and automatically generates:
• • app/agent_runtime_app.py: The production-grade service
wrapper.
• • deployment_metadata.json: The layout schema used by Agent
Runtime to spin up resources.
Your core agent logic in app/agent.py remains completely untouched and preserved.
6. Packaging and Local Verification
6. Packaging and Local Verification
Before initiating a cloud upload, lock your packages and run a local dry-run to identify potential
dependency conflicts.
👉 Prompt Antigravity:
Lock my python dependencies and run a dry-run deployment to
check for any
configuration or dependency issues.
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it first runs uv lock in the terminal to generate a
deterministic lockfile, ensuring consistent library versions in the cloud. It then executes
agents-cli deploy --dry-run to verify configuration validity and preview the
deployment steps without provisioning cloud resources. You can review the dry-run output in the
terminal to confirm all files and settings are correct.
7. Deploy to Agent Runtime
Deploy your Ambient Expense Agent to Agent Runtime.
👉 Prompt Antigravity:
Deploy this agent to Agent Runtime.
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it activates the google-agents-cli-deploy
skill and runs agents-cli deploy --project YOUR_PROJECT_ID --
region us-west1. The packaging, upload, and Agent Runtime provisioning process
typically takes 5–10 minutes. Antigravity will monitor the deployment progress in the terminal,
and once completed, it displays your live endpoint URL.
💡 Pro Tip (Manage Timeout Windows): If you prefer not to lock up your terminal during
long deployments, you can instruct Antigravity to use the --no-wait flag to start the
deployment asynchronously, and check progress later using agents-cli deploy --
status.
If you have issues deploying your agent, consider using a different region. The Google Cloud
Region Picker tool can help you determine the best region for your project based on latency,
price, and carbon footprint.
8. Test your Agent
8. Test your Agent
Once your agent is deployed, you can verify that it automatically approves small expenses, and
properly flags for a human-in-the-loop verification for larger expenses.
👉 Prompt Antigravity to verify the live deployed engine:
Test my deployed Agent Runtime engine with two test cases:
first a standard
meal expense of $50 to verify automatic approval, and
second, a client dinner
expense of $150 to verify that the human-in-the-loop pause
is triggered.
Note: When Antigravity runs this test prompt against your live endpoint, if it encounters any
deployment or execution errors, it will automatically attempt to debug the issue, apply the
necessary code fixes, and redeploy the agent for you.
Alternatively, you can test your agent manually using the Cloud Console Playground preview.
To open the Playground:
1 1 In the Google Cloud Console, use the navigation menu to select Agent
Platform > Deployments.
2 2 Select your deployed agent from the deployments list.
3 3 Click the Playground button to open the interactive test chat interface.
👉 To test the Auto-Approval(<$100), paste the following JSON payload into the chat box:
{"data": {"amount": 50.0, "submitter": "user@example.com",
"category": "meals", "description": "Lunch", "date":
"2026-06-04"}}
You should receive a JSON response showing the output of the auto_approve node with
status "approved".
👉 To test the Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) flow, paste the following JSON payload.
{"data": {"amount": 150.0, "submitter": "user@example.com",
"category": "meals", "description": "Client dinner",
"date": "2026-06-04"}}
This will trigger the review_agent, emit the warning alert, and then pause execution, yielding a
RequestInput (Human-in-the-loop) asking for approval,
9. Monitor and Observe your Production Agent
With Agent Runtime, telemetry is automatically wired. Every interaction, model call, and tool
execution streams real-time logs and spans to your project.
1 1 Inspect Traces: Open the Cloud Trace Console to audit live transaction
maps, model latencies, and tool execution steps.
2 2 Audit Logs: Use Cloud Logging to inspect real-time standard output and
diagnostic stack traces.
3 3 Aggregate Analytics: If the --bq-analytics flag was enabled
during scaffolding, query your logs inside BigQuery using SQL to view approval ratios
and conversational turn trends.
The following SQL query provides an example for calculating approval ratios. You can prompt
Antigravity to customize this query for your specific project and BigQuery dataset:
10. (Optional) Verify Registration in Agent Registry
To allow other services, developers, or agents in your organization to safely discover and
consume your expense agent, it must be registered in the enterprise Agent Registry (Gemini
Enterprise).
Because you deployed your agent to Agent Runtime, it is automatically registered in the Agent
Registry. Any future updates or deletions of your agent in Agent Runtime will automatically
sync to the Agent Registry as well.
👉 Prompt Antigravity to verify your agent's automatic registration:
Verify that my deployed expense agent is automatically
registered in the Gemini
Enterprise Agent Registry.
When Antigravity executes this prompt, it runs agents-cli publish gemini-
enterprise --list in the terminal. This queries the Agent Registry and lists all
registered Gemini Enterprise agents in your project, allowing you to confirm that your Ambient
Expense Agent is active and discoverable across your organization.