1. Introduction
Agent Skills are a way to equip your agent with knowledge and company context. An Agent
Skill is a folder containing a SKILL.md file , with scripts/, references/, and assets/
directories. Section 2 covers the anatomy in detail.
Agent Skills are becoming the standard for cross-platform portability. But why the
sudden adoption velocity? We believe Agent Skills tackle four main friction points in AI
agent development:
1. Too many instructions, worse results. Dumping every instruction you can think of into
a single system prompt inevitably degrades Large Language Model (LLM) performance, a
problem known as context rot. Skills solve this by loading exclusively on demand. Section
5 unpacks the research behind this.
May 2026 7
Agent Skills
2. Knowing how, not just knowing what. LLMs already have reasonable analogs for
remembering what happened (episodic memory) and remembering facts (semantic
memory). What they've lacked is a way to remember how to do things step by step, which
is called procedural memory. Agent Skills can be seen as the first credible procedural
memory primitive for LLM Agents.
3. Multi-agent overload. The ecosystem was flooded with complex multi-agent systems
that are notoriously hard to build and maintain. While still necessary for certain tasks, Skills
allow a single general-purpose agent to seamlessly flex into many specialist roles. Section
3 develops this argument in depth, with a worked example.
4. Portability. A folder with a markdown file is a remarkably lightweight primitive. Any agent
with filesystem access can use them, making them perfectly portable across a multi-
vendor AI landscape.
In this whitepaper, we cater to two personas: Builders (those using Skills) and Developers
(those creating, versioning, and managing them). We’ll gently walk through what a Skill is and
how to use it (Sections 2 to 3), before diving into complex Developer topics like evaluation,
production readiness, meta-skills, and composition (Sections 4 to 8).
(Impatient? Appendix A offers a printable operational cheat sheet, and Appendix B walks
through a retail case study).
May 2026 8
Agent Skills
2. What is an Agent Skill (and How to
Build Your First One)
Agent Skills are a primitive for giving a general-purpose agent on-demand specialist
competence. Yes, a Skill can be as simple as a single markdown file, but it doesn’t have to
stop there, and the paradigm behind it is quite innovative.
Today we are seeing Agent Skills emerge through two distinct patterns:
The first path is driven by subject matter experts, who already have institutional
knowledge written down somewhere. Think of a compliance officer with a 30-page runbook,
or an HR manager with onboarding guides for new hires. None of them need to learn to code
to write and start using a Skill. They already have the content; the only job left is to translate it
into a format the agent can use smartly.
The second path involves developers wrapping agentic or coded workflows into Skills.
If an agent successfully executes a non-trivial, repetitive task, you don't want it to have to
figure out the process from scratch next time. Instead, you want the agent to create a Skill
out of this successful run. In short, we are observing an emerging pattern: anything that is a
good, reusable workflow becomes a Skill, and you don't have to write it yourself, the agent
does, you review. This is already meta-skills territory, which we introduce gently here before
going deep on it in Section 6.
Both groups produce the same artifact, a Skill folder anchored by the SKILL.md primitive,
but the journey to get there is different.
May 2026 9
Agent Skills
Skill Anatomy & Progressive Disclosure
Before going into the different paths, let’s review the Skill anatomy. Every skill lives in its own
directory and must contain a SKILL.md. To see the full canonical structure, as defined by the
open standard at agentskills.io, let's look at a practical example.
Below is an illustrative folder for a Skill designed to conduct daily cafe preparation.
(Remember, the only mandatory file is SKILL.md. The rest is optional):
cafe-preparation/
├── SKILL.md # Required: metadata + instructions
├── scripts/ # Optional: executable code (any language)
│ ├── calc_quantities.py # Estimates lattes, croissants, etc.
│ └── convert_to_ingredients.py # Converts drinks and pastries into..
├── references/ # Optional: supplementary context
│ ├── menu_and_recipes.md # Matcha latte: 3g powder, 200ml...
│ └── minimums.md # Always prep for at least 40 lattes...
└── assets/ # Optional: templates, configs, schemas
├── prep_sheet_template.md # The final layout for the kitchen staff
└── shopping_list_template.md # The layout for vendor ordering
Snippet 1: Directory tree structure showing the standard layout and progressive disclosure design for the
cafe-preparation skill.
The innovative piece is the progressive disclosure. Skills load in three levels:
1. Metadata (name + description) is always in the agent's context.
2. SKILL.md body is loaded only when the skill triggers.
3. Bundled resources are loaded strictly as needed (and scripts execute without ever
polluting the token window).
May 2026 10
Agent Skills
This means you can have a hundred installed skills but only pay the tiny token cost for their
metadata on every turn. Let's get practical and look at how to build one.
Path A: Translating what you already know
A minimal SKILL.md template lives in Appendix A. You can copy it directly. The piece worth
focusing on first is the YAML frontmatter, because it's the activation trigger:
---
name: cafe-preparation
description: |
Calculates daily ingredient needs and generates prep sheets for cafe operations.
Use when the user asks to estimate daily quantities, convert drinks to
ingredients, or generate shopping lists.
Do NOT use for employee shift scheduling or financial accounting.
---
Snippet 2: YAML frontmatter configuration for the cafe-preparation skill.
There are two things worth getting right from the start: naming and the description field.
Naming. When naming, be obvious and boring: use snake_case for directories (e.g.,
bigquery_ingestion), kebab-case for skill names (e.g., pdf-processing), and prefer the
gerund form like managing-databases. Avoid generic names such as utils or tools and omit
any internal jargon.
Description. This is your routing algorithm. It is the only thing the model sees to decide
whether to load the Agent Skill. State what it does, front-load trigger keywords, be pushy if
the model under-triggers, and explicitly state what it is not for.
May 2026 11
Agent Skills
Once the SKILL.md is drafted, you build out the rest of the folder. This is where progressive
disclosure starts paying off. Anything that doesn't need to be in the SKILL.md body goes
somewhere else:
• Scripts. Deterministic work (parsing exports, math, formatting) lives in scripts/. The model
decides what to do; the script does the heavy lifting.
• References. Knowledge that is only relevant once the skill is running (domain principles,
definitions, edge case handling) lives in references/ and loads on demand.
• Assets. Templates and schemas live in assets/.
Rule of thumb: if the SKILL.md is starting to get long, the next paragraph probably belongs
in references/ and not in the body.
(Impatient? Appendix A offers a printable operational cheat sheet with curated Do’s and
Don’ts to guide your initial Skill development).1
Path B: Crystallizing what the agent just did
The second path starts from the other end. Instead of translating something you already
have, you're crystallizing something the agent just did.
The agent completed a task successfully. You noticed the workflow was reusable. You want
the next instance of that kind of task to benefit from what was just learned.
This is the meta-skills territory: Skills whose job is to capture or improve other Skills. Tools
like Anthropic's skill-creator2, Nous Research's Hermes Agent3, and the self-improving-
agent-skills pattern from awesome-llm-apps4 all support this workflow. The agent watches a
successful trajectory and proposes a SKILL.md draft. You review, instead of authoring.
May 2026 12
Agent Skills
The same quality bar applies. A reviewed, iterated, agent-drafted Skill can be excellent. An
un-reviewed agent-drafted Skill is often worse than no Skill at all. We come back to this whole
topic with much more depth in Section 6, where we cover meta-skills.
Trying it out & How to install Skills today
Once the folder is ready (whether you wrote it or an agent drafted it for you), it is time to try it
out. Drop it in the right place for your tool, restart the agent, and test it with a natural prompt.
Watch the trace to confirm the skill actually triggered. Then try a prompt where it should NOT
trigger and confirm it stays quiet.
But where exactly is the "right place"?
This is where things get a bit nuanced, and it's one of the downsides of the exploding
popularity of Skills. Every agent or coding tool has converged on the format, but they each
look in a slightly different place for it. Broadly, there are three paradigms for how you will
interact with and install Skills today:
1. The File Drop (Coding Agents & CLIs): For local environments, the pattern is file-based,
you drop or install the skill folder into a specific hidden directory and the agent picks it
up. While a highly welcome cross-tool convention is emerging around a shared .agents/
skills/ folder at your project root, many tools still protect their own bespoke paths.
(Pro tip: If you bounce between multiple CLI tools and IDEs, community managers like
skillport or openskills will automatically symlink your central skills library to every tool's
expected location).
May 2026 13
Agent Skills
2. The UI Install (Web & Enterprise Workspaces): If you are using web-based collaborative
platforms or consumer AI chatbots, you rarely touch a terminal or a hidden folder. These
platforms allow you to install, upload, or manage your Skill folders directly through a
visual UI registry with just a few clicks, handling the routing behind the scenes for your
whole team.
3. The Programmatic Route (Custom Frameworks): If you are building bespoke, non-
coding agents from scratch (for example, using the Google Agent Development Kit), you
load skills programmatically. You point your code to the folder path—such as registering
it through a SkillToolset class5, which seamlessly auto-generates the necessary load_skill
routing tools for the model under the hood.
The overall pattern is the same everywhere: drop the skill folder into the right directory,
restart the agent, and it picks it up. The "right directory" is what changes depending on
the tool.
A piece of advice: check the documentation of your specific coding agent or AI chatbot
before assuming. The format is shared, but the install path, the activation rules, and the per-
tool details (allowed-tools whitelisting, security gates, plugin bundling) are not.
Wait but how does a Skill differ from MCP and AGENTS.md?
To establish the architectural fit of Agent Skills, it helps to map these primitives.
May 2026 14
Agent Skills
Skill vs. MCP. These do not compete, they compose. Model Context Protocol is about reach:
an MCP server connects the agent to an external system (Drive, Salesforce, BigQuery, or an
internal API). A Skill is about know-how: it teaches the agent how to think about a particular
kind of work. When a Skill needs data, it tells the agent to call a tool, typically one provided by
an MCP server.
Skill vs. AGENTS.md. From one side AGENTS.md is always loaded within the project; Skills
load on demand. The cleanest setups use both. Keep AGENTS.md tight (project conventions,
stack, build commands, etc.) and if needed use it also as a router into the Skills library, with a
short catalog at the bottom that tells the agent what’s available.
3. Why did Agent Skills become so
popular, so fast?
Imagine it's early 2025. You are asked to build a system that offload repetitive back office
work: generating slide decks from briefs while adhering to the company style, parsing
structured invoicing PDFs, drafting HR onboarding guides, summarising weekly compliance
reports, and tackling a long tail of similar tasks that will inevitably grow as the team finds new
things to automate.
Most likely, you would have defaulted to a multi-agent architecture. A router agent at the top
dispatching to a handful of specialist sub-agents beneath it. You would then spend agonizing
hours on CI/CD pipelines, orchestration logic, and ensuring that a deployment for the new HR
sub-agent didn't break the invoice sub-agent.
May 2026 15
Agent Skills
With the release of Agent Skills, this workflow becomes vastly simpler. This friction is exactly
how the Skill format was first created by Anthropic, with the first skills for reading PDFs
and creating slides6, which represents a much lighter version to accomplish this. Instead
of a router dispatching subagents, you have one agent with a library of skills. Skills can run
commands, call MCP servers, and bundle Python scripts. The agent decides which to load
when. You maintain skills, not agents, and the operational surface can shrink.
To be very clear: Agent Skills do not kill multi-agent architectures.
Multi-agent remains the absolute right answer when you have genuine parallelism, real
capability boundaries (different access, different security postures, different external
systems), hierarchical decomposition where the abstraction layers actually differ, adversarial
or check-and-balance setups, sub-agent intercommunication, or heterogeneous models.
This list isn't exhaustive.
What Skills did was introduce a missing architectural primitive. Many systems that were built
multi-agent by default can now be elegantly simplified to single-agent-with-skills by design.
Skills for chatbots, for coding agents, or for multi-agent
enterprise use cases?
The first publicly visible skills were AI chatbot-shaped. The coding-agent narrative arrived
within days or weeks. And once it did, skills exploded. They landed straight into the vibe-
coding fever and turned out to be the format developers had been wanting.
May 2026 16
Agent Skills
In some multi-agentic architectures, by definition, each sub-agent is already a specialist. A
research agent might not need a research skill. Skills are more useful in scenarios when one
general-purpose agent has the flexibility to become a specialist across different things, by
design. However, there might be cases where multi-agent and skills do compose well, for
example, if there is a need for each specialized agent to have its own scoped skill library.
Now consider a logistics company with 100 process variants depending on product type,
tools, route constraints, customer SLAs, regulatory zones, etc. How could this be solved
elegantly and lightweight:
• One agent, one giant context window. Causes immediate context rot and exorbitant
token costs.
• RAG over the runbooks. Probably the right answer two years ago. But you're now running
a vector DB, an embedding model, and a chunking strategy whose quality has nothing to
do with the actual procedures.
• Multi-agent, one subagent per process. 100 subagents, each with a process-specific
system prompt. An operational nightmare of 100 deployments, 100 evaluation surfaces,
and complex routing layers.
• One agent, 100 skills. This fits the skills format as there are many variants for the same
job. The progressive disclosure of skills means 100 skills cost ~100 × 50 tokens = ~5,000
tokens of always-loaded metadata. Logistics requests carry strong activation cues:
SKU, origin, weight, hazmat flag, SLA, which makes skill descriptions sharp and selection
reliable. Procedures live in version control. Adding the 101st variant is a new folder, not a
new deployment. Easier to maintain and to scale.
However, the most important part is to always have a strict evaluation process and compare
different performances to make the final decision (Section 4 covers what that evaluation
work actually looks like in practice).
May 2026 17
Agent Skills
As a mental note, adoption follows the path of least resistance. Anyone who can write
documentation can write a skill. That lowers the barrier and the latent procedural knowledge
sitting in wikis, runbooks, and engineers' heads finally has somewhere structured to flow.
4. Evaluating Skills
Now you have a first skill, or maybe a small library of them. The question that immediately
follows is: how do you know they actually work? How skills fail, how to test them, and the four
conditions every skill should pass before it earns a place in your library.
An Agent Skill without a test is a hope, not a capability.
When researchers recently benchmarked 84 real-world agent tasks in SkillsBench (2025)7,
they found that 19% performed worse with a skill than without one. These poorly designed
skills were not just neutral noise, they actively degraded capability. Fortunately, these failures
are predictable and fall into four distinct modes:
1. Trigger Failure: The wrong skill fires, or the correct one fails to fire.
2. Execution Failure: The skill triggers correctly, but produces incorrect output or errant
tool calls.
3. Token Budget Failure: A massive skill body crowds the context window, degrading
performance on unrelated turns.
4. Regression: A newly added skill overlaps with an existing one, breaking previously
working routing.
May 2026 18
Agent Skills
Trigger failures surface in routing logs; execution failures in output quality; token budget
failures under realistic context load; regression failures only when the full library is
exercised together.
Figure 1: Notice how the failure modes branch out. Trigger and execution failures happen on a single-turn
level, while token budget and regression failures only appear when multiple skills interact under a heavy
production load.
May 2026 19
Agent Skills
The Evaluation Toolkit
Five complementary testing patterns cover the full failure surface.
Pattern Description Example Failure Mode When Required
Addressed
Eval-as-Unit-Test Test file for the Three JSON eval cases All Every skill,
skill running in CI run via agenteval on every change
on every change every push; a failing
test blocks merges
Golden Dataset Curated, 30 representative Execution, Draft tier
versioned (input, queries with expected Trigger and above
expected output) tool calls/formats
pairs stored with committed in the
the skill skill directory
LLM-as-Judge A peer model Reference-guided Execution Read-only
evaluates output scoring across three and draft
against a rubric rubric dimensions, run
at scale twice with swapped
positions to neutralize
ordering bias
dversarial / Systematic One rephrasing and Trigger, Before action
Red-Team probing designed one negative boundary Execution –alllowed
to expose case for every positive graduation
failure modes trigger; agentregress
flags regressions
Canary / Shadow Deployment to Shadow: Parallel Regression Before each
Mode controlled traffic offline comparison. action-allowed
before full rollout Canary: 1% live release
traffic monitored via
selftune for 24 hours
Table 1: The Evaluation Toolkit, outlining five complementary testing patterns designed to cover the full
failure surface of Agent Skills.
May 2026 20
Agent Skills
Figure 2: This visual highlights the gatekeeping mechanism. The metadata acts as a thin routing layer,
keeping the active token count low until the specific activation cues match the user intent.
The trigger is the first gate
A skill that never fires cannot help. A skill that fires too broadly injects irrelevant context.
Vercel's production analysis8 revealed a 56% non-invocation rate for skills expected to
activate consistently. More critically, a skill stripped of its instructions scored 58%, while the
agent without the skill scored 63%. This 5-point deficit demonstrates that a poorly-designed
skill can actively subtract capability.
In this same study, Vercel also noted that a passive AGENTS.md index of project conventions
achieved a 100% pass rate against a 53% baseline. This reinforces that skills are best
reserved for narrow, action-specific workflows, whereas global context should remain in
passive, always-accessible documentation.
May 2026 21
Agent Skills
Now, to hit the industry-standard 90% trigger accuracy rate, your SKILL.md description, the
only thing the model sees during routing, must pass four checks:
• Testable specificity: You must write 3 positive and 3 negative triggers.
• Clarity: Ambiguous queries don't overlap with adjacent skills.
• Execution fidelity: It describes actual performance, not aspirational behavior.
• Rephrasing stability: It routes consistently regardless of how the user phrases the intent.
Output quality and tool trajectory
Once a skill triggers, test both the final output (what the agent says) and the tool trajectory
(what the agent does) separately.
A smart way to do this is to use the Evaluation-Driven Development (EDD). Invert the
workflow by writing three JSON evaluation cases (Input, Expected Tools, Expected Output)
before drafting the SKILL.md. It forces a clear functional spec upfront. When using LLM-as-
Judge to score outputs at scale, remember two non-negotiables: swap the positions of the
reference and actual outputs to eliminate ordering bias, and calibrate against human ratings
until you hit 90% agreement.
Latitude's analysis (March 2026)9 found that final-output-only scoring passes 20% to 40%
more cases than trajectory-aware scoring. This gap represents instances where the agent
reached the correct answer via an incorrect sequence of tool calls. Acceptable in read-
only scenarios. Critical in action-allowed skills, where incorrect tool trajectories can cause
irreversible side effects.
May 2026 22
Agent Skills
The Google ADK eval framework10 offers three trajectory scoring modes: EXACT (exact
order), IN_ORDER (ordered subset), and ANY_ORDER (unordered subset). Trajectory
validation should align with the skill tier: read-only skills can use ANY_ORDER, action-allowed
skills require IN_ORDER or EXACT.
Figure 3: Follow the inversion path. Instead of writing code first, the workflow forces you to define expected
tool trajectories and evaluation rubrics as the very first step.
May 2026 23
Agent Skills
System vs. Skill: The Evaluation Illusion
Trajectory testing evaluates the composite system of the host agent interacting with the
skill rather than the skill in isolation. When a multi-skill trajectory fails, it is often impossible
to decouple agent routing, instruction quality, or execution fidelity. To simplify calibration,
evaluate skills via a "Single-Skill Sub-Agent pattern" (Agent + 1 Skill vs. Base Agent); save
complex multi-skill co-loading for advanced production staging.
Evaluation-Driven Development (EDD)11 inverts the workflow by writing three JSON
evaluation cases (Input, Expected Tools, Expected Output) before drafting the SKILL.md. It
forces a clear functional spec upfront.This forces a clear functional specification upfront. A
minimal eval case looks like this:
JSON
{
"case_id": "refund_dup_charge_001",
"input": "I was charged twice for order #4521 last Tuesday",
"expected_skill": "refund_processor",
"expected_tool_calls": [
{"tool": "lookup_order", "args": {"order_id": "4521"}},
{"tool": "check_duplicate_charge", "args": {"order_id": "4521"}}
],
"expected_output_format": "confirmation_with_refund_id",
"rubric": ["acknowledges duplicate", "cites order id", "provides next step"]
}
Snippet 3: A minimal JSON evaluation case example used in Evaluation-Driven Development (EDD) to
explicitly define input parameters, expected tool trajectories, and evaluation rubrics upfront.
Drafting three such cases upfront surfaces description ambiguities and tool-trajectory errors
before they compound in the skill body.
May 2026 24
Agent Skills
When using LLM-as-Judge to score outputs at scale, remember two non-negotiables: swap
the positions of the reference and actual outputs to eliminate ordering bias, and calibrate
against human ratings until you hit 90% agreement.
Token budget: isolation is a trap
Never evaluate a skill purely in isolation. Agents in production co-load 5 to 15 skills
simultaneously. A skill body exceeding 5,000 tokens might work perfectly alone, but it will
cause context rot when co-loaded.
The Compound Evaluation Trap: Skill vs. Agent
Trajectory testing evaluates the composite system. The skill and the host agent together. If a
test fails, avoid over-engineering the 'SKILL.md' for a specific model, which ruins portability.
Instead, isolate execution logic from routing by using a "Two-Tiered Assert Framework":
validate underlying tool code independently, and audit `SKILL.md` triggers across multiple
model families to catch brittle, architecture-locked descriptions.
MCPVerse12 noted an 18.2% accuracy drop in Claude-4-Sonnet due to tool proliferation and
context attention competition. Additionally, Chroma Research (2025)13 found that all frontier
models degrade as input grows, particularly when hindered by co-loaded noise.
May 2026 25
Agent Skills
Figure 4: Look at the performance gap between a single running skill and 15 co-loaded skills. The curve
illustrates why passing an isolated test is a false positive for production readiness.
Because of this, skills must graduate through strict tiers of authority:
• Read-Only: LLM-as-Judge eval; 90% trigger accuracy.
• Draft-Only (Human Review): Golden dataset of 20+ cases; human approval.
• Action-Allowed: Full adversarial red-teaming; sustained success across multiple runs (not
just a single lucky pass); no rollback events; sustained pass^k.
May 2026 26
Agent Skills
pass^k measures consistent, rather than occasional, success by running the evaluation $k$
times and requiring success on every run. On tau-bench (Yao et al., 2024)14, GPT-4o scored
61% on pass^1 but dropped below 25% on pass^8, demonstrating that single-run success is a
poor predictor of production reliability.
When calibrating these thresholds, two factors are critical:
1. Production Degradation: ReliabilityBench15 shows that production performance typically
drops 20% to 30% compared to offline benchmark pass@1 numbers.
2. Simulation Bias: Simulation-based evaluations can suffer from an optimistic bias of up to
9% (the "Lost in Simulation"16 finding).
Consequently, human review of representative outputs remains the ultimate validation signal
for action-allowed graduation.
What "eval coverage" means
A skill achieves complete eval coverage by satisfying four conditions mapped directly to the
primary failure modes:
• Trigger Failure: Verifying trigger behavior with both positive (should fire) and negative
(should not fire) test cases.
• Execution Failure: Ensuring correct outputs across a representative range of
expected inputs.
• Regression: Confirming that adding the skill causes zero performance drops in the
existing library.
May 2026 27
Agent Skills
• Token Budget Failure: Bounding the skill's token footprint to ensure it does not degrade
performance on unrelated turns.
This checklist governs graduation; failure on any single condition holds the skill in the draft
tier, regardless of its happy-path performance. Once verified, the skill and its accompanying
eval suite are ready for production deployment (detailed in Section 5).
5. From Prototype to Production
Sections 1 to 4 covered what skills are, how to write one, and how to evaluate them. This
section is about what changes when you put a working prototype in front of a real customer.
The short version: the model is no longer the interesting part, and skills are the engineering
primitive that lets you ship reliably.
Google's Agents CLI17 in Agent Platform is a CLI and skills package for building, evaluating,
and deploying AI agents on Google Cloud. Agents are built with Google's Agent Development
Kit (ADK) and Agents CLI handles everything around it: scaffolding, evaluation, deployment,
and observability.
May 2026 28
Agent Skills
Figure 5: The Agents CLI install flow. One uvx command installs seven skills into the developer's existing
coding agent, covering the full agent lifecycle (workflow, ADK code, scaffold, eval, deploy, publish,
observability). The same skills work across Claude Code, Codex CLI, Antigravity, and any other compliant
coding agent.
The working example points to three properties that generalize beyond Google’s setup:
• The expertise lives in the skills, not the runtime. The runtime is commoditized; the
seven skills are the durable asset.
• The skills package composes with what you already use. Install the skills and
your existing coding tool gains new capabilities; the same pattern to aim for internally:
capabilities that compose into existing tooling, not another portal.
May 2026 29
Agent Skills
• The full lifecycle ships as skills. Scaffold, build, evaluate, deploy, publish, observe. Every
stage that once needed its own tooling now fits the skills format.
What's actually inside an agent runtime
Underneath the framework, the agent loop has converged across vendors: the runtime
maintains a conversation, calls the model, executes tools, reads files, returns a response.
What’s striking inside one of these runtimes is how little of the code is about reasoning.
A recent reverse-engineering of Claude Code v2.1.88 (Liu, Zhao, Shang, and Shen, 2026)18
found that 98.4% of the codebase is operational infrastructure: permission classifiers,
context compaction pipelines, subagent delegation, session storage and only 1.6% is the
agent loop itself. The model sits behind a remote API; the engineering around it is what
makes the system production-grade. The companion site ccunpacked.dev maps the same
architecture visually.
This is the architectural insight behind everything that follows. As foundation models
converge in baseline reasoning, the differentiator for autonomous reliability becomes the
deterministic engineering around the model and inside that engineering, the unit that gets
composed and reused is the skill.
May 2026 30
Agent Skills
Figure 6: The demo-to-deploy gap. Team confidence peaks early, then collapses on contact with a real
customer environment. The instinct is to call it a model problem; it almost never is.
Why skills are the unit of improvement
The naive theory of agent improvement is that better models produce better agents. In
production, the model is the infrastructure and skills are the primitive that lets improvements
ship. Each new skill is a small, owned, testable unit of capability (as we set up in Section
1). When a new edge case appears, it takes editing one SKILL.md; the agent's effective
capability grows without the challenges of monolithic prompt engineering.
Three properties of skills make this work:
• They are conditional. Loaded only when their description matches the task.
May 2026 31
Agent Skills
• They are composable. One skill can call tools from another, or chain downstream, without
either knowing about the other (Section 7 develops the composition story in depth).
• They are owned. Each lives in a versioned folder with a clear author, so improvement is
distributed rather than bottlenecked through a central platform team.
Compare against the alternatives:
Improvement Cycle time Failure mode Who can do it Context Tax
style
Model swap Days to weeks Regression in ML/platform team None
unrelated tasks (weights-based)
System prompt Minutes to hours Context rot, Whoever owns the Static
edit instruction conflict prompt file (every turn pays)
Fine-tune Weeks to months Catastrophic ML team only None
forgetting, (weights-based)
overfitting
New skill Hours to days Bounded with only Any domain team Dynamic
matching turns (loaded
on-demand
when triggered)
Table 2: Comparison of agent improvement methodologies across cycle times, failure modes, organizational
ownership, and context costs.
The failure mode that breaks demos: context overflow
The most common failure mode of agents in production is not hallucination. It is context
overflow: the model receiving more context than it can effectively use, and degrading silently
before the operator notices. Two strands of research ground this:
May 2026 32
Agent Skills
Lost in the Middle (Liu et al., TACL 202419). Across multi-document QA and retrieval,
performance is highest when relevant information sits at the start or end of the input and
degrades in the middle; a U-curve that holds even for models trained on long contexts.
Context Rot (Chroma Research, 202520). Across 18 frontier models; Claude 4 Opus and
Sonnet, Gemini 2.5, Qwen3; performance degrades as input grows, even when task difficulty
is held constant. Every model gets worse, and faster when relevant content is hard to
distinguish from distractors. The noise typical of real agent contexts (tool outputs, half-
relevant retrievals, intermediate reasoning) is among the worst.
Figure 7: Context rot in practice. As prompt size grows, accuracy on a fixed task degrades, long before the
context window fills. The dashed line shows the naive expectation; the curve shows what 18 frontier models
actually do (Liu et al. 2024; Chroma 2025).
May 2026 33
Agent Skills
What this means for the token budget
Progressive disclosure, covered in Section 2, is the architectural answer: metadata for every
skill loads at startup, a skill’s body loads only when its description matches, and supporting
files load only when the body references them.
The math is worth showing. Consider an agent with fifty distinct workflows. As a single
system prompt, it loads 15,000 tokens every turn. As a skills library, it loads ~4,000 tokens
of descriptions plus the ~2,000-token body of the one active skill with ~6,000 tokens total,
with the other forty-nine bodies on disk. Anthropic has published examples where converting
a workflow to skills cut active context from roughly 150,000 tokens to 2,000, a reduction of
more than 98 percent.
Figure 8: Token economics: a single big prompt versus a fifty-skill library. The library has fifty units of
capability available, but only the active body sits in context at any moment.
May 2026 34
Agent Skills
Three practical implications follow:
• Capacity is the wrong metric. A 1M-token window can show significant degradation at
50K tokens.
• Active context is a budget, not a vessel. Every token in front of the model takes
attention from every other. Treat the system prompt the way infra teams treat memory: a
finite resource, allocated deliberately.
• Skills resolve the constraint. They keep active context small while keeping available
capability effectively unbounded.
Once a team has a working library, the questions shift from maintaining a single skill to
evolution, composition, and the larger ecosystem.
6. On Meta-Skills and
Self-Improving Skills
So far, every skill in this document has been written by a human. A domain expert sits down,
drafts a SKILL.md, tests it, ships it. That's the right place to start. But once you have a
working library, the natural next question is: can the agent help write, evaluate, and improve
skills too?
This is the meta-skills territory. Skills whose job is to author, evaluate, or improve other skills.
In practice, these "meta-skills" fall into four buckets:
May 2026 35
Agent Skills
1. Authoring. Skills that take a description of a workflow and produce a draft SKILL.md.
Google's ADK21 has a "skill factory" pattern that does this through its SkillToolset.
Anthropic ships a skill-creator Skill22 that walks you through creation, evaluation,
and tuning.
2. Assisted authoring from traces. Instead of asking a human to describe a workflow,
watch the agent do it successfully a few times, then turn that trace into a skill. The skill-
creator workflow supports this directly through trace-based harvesting. The human's
job shifts from writing the skill to confirming that the harvested version captures the
right steps.
Figure 9: The step-by-step loop demonstrates how real, successful production histories are transformed
into reliable procedural memories without manual human drafting
3. Improvement. Skills that take an existing skill plus a set of failing evaluation cases and
propose edits. Saboo's SkillOptimizer24 and Anthropic's description-optimization loop are
both examples. Another is Karpathy's autoresearch pattern25, where an agent proposes
a change to a target file, runs a bounded experiment, and keeps the change only if a
metric improves.
May 2026 36
Agent Skills
Figure 10: Notice the evaluation gating. The agent can suggest changes to descriptions or instructions, but it
cannot commit them to the library unless the unit tests pass.
4. Library evolution. Skills that grow the library over time, the way Voyager grew its own
Minecraft skill library26. The agent finishes a task it had no skill for, notices that it just
solved a recurring problem, and proposes adding a new skill to cover it. Schmid's self-
learning-skill27 is a community reference implementation of this pattern.
Where this falls apart
Meta-skills only work if your evaluation suite is good. An agent that's allowed to edit its own
skills will happily optimize for whatever metric you point it at, including metrics that are easy
to game. The Section 4 evaluation work is what keeps this honest. Without solid trigger
accuracy tests, regression tests, and human spot-checks, an autonomous improvement loop
will quietly make your library worse while reporting that it's getting better.
A few habits that have held up:
• Anything an agent writes enters the library at the draft tier, regardless of how
confident the meta-skill is. It graduates through the same Read / Draft / Act ladder from
Section 4 as any human-written skill.
May 2026 37
Agent Skills
• Keep a human in the loop for the first few edits. Even when the metric clearly improves,
scan the diff. The kind of mistake an agent makes (overfitting the description to a few
test cases, breaking a downstream skill it didn't know existed) is exactly the kind a human
catches in 30 seconds.
• Don't start with meta-skills. Get the manual authoring loop working first. The fastest
way to get a bad library is to point an agent at an empty folder and ask it to generate
fifty skills.
Where this is going
The pattern is settling into something like: humans write the first version of every skill, meta-
skills handle the repetitive part of maintenance (tuning descriptions, adding test cases,
surfacing regressions), and a small subset of teams experiment with full self-extension. The
interesting frontier is the third category, where the agent proposes new skills based on what
it sees in production traffic. It's promising. It's also where things go wrong fastest if the
evaluation gates aren't tight.
The practical version of this is in Appendix A where the cheatsheet covers what to do (and
not do) when you're tempted to let the agent write its own skills.
May 2026 38
Agent Skills
7. Composing and Packaging Skills
Real workflows do not fit inside a skill. The composition problem is how skills reference each
other, pass state, and avoid circular dependencies.
Passing raw LLM outputs between isolated skills in a monolithic system is ineffective: state
gets obfuscated, execution becomes non-deterministic, and debugging is hard. Agent
architecture has evolved from naive prompt chaining to predictable orchestration.
Execution Routing: DAG Orchestration
Early architectures proved brittle and susceptible to compounding errors when early stages
hallucinated. The industry solution is Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) orchestration.
• Decoupled State: State routing in a DAG architecture does not rely on accumulating
execution history within the LLM's prompt.
• File Message Bus: The DAG controller orchestrates handoffs by passing structured
schema references between subagent nodes.
• Protected Attention: Abstracting the payload from the model's text input prevents
context window bloat and preserves the model's capacity.
May 2026 39
Agent Skills
Environment Packaging: Capability Profiles
Activating every skill degrades natural language routing and overwhelms the context
window. Architects should utilize tools to manage "Capability Profiles," which function as
specialized personas tailored to specific execution states. A profile acts as a modular tool
bundle defining:
• Active skills and tool access.
• System instructions and operational guardrails.
• Automated workflows and subagent topologies.
• LLM parameters, such as model choice and temperature.
During execution, the orchestration layer unloads previous system instructions and flushes
stale variables before swapping the new Capability Profile into memory. This strict teardown
and rebuild process prevents context loss.
Populating the Graph: The Canonical Skill Taxonomy
To build DAG, discrete engineering capabilities map to specific node functions within an
execution graph nodes:
• Generator: Convert user intent into structured artifacts.
• Reviewer & Gate: Deterministic gates blocking execution if validation fails.
• Pipeline: Orchestrate linear paths within the broader DAG environment.
• Inversion & Recovery: Force the agent to clarify assumption before execution.
May 2026 40
Agent Skills
• Domain Context Wrappers: Act as reference nodes teaching domain conventions.
Context Debt and Shifting Intelligence Left
Skills burn model attention, which is a scarce resource. When authors attempt deterministic
behavior at runtime by bloating skill descriptions (e.g., "ALWAYS DO X"), they accumulate
Context Debt. Models learn to ignore these capitalized imperatives, exactly as a human
developer ignores a wall of unreadable warning text.
The engineering best practice is to Shift Intelligence Left. Instead of hoping an LLM
correctly interprets complex rules at runtime, distill subjective judgments into skills. By
pushing logic out of the LLM's prompt and into standard, testable scripts, you reduce the
chaotic surface area of your application.
Architectural Tradeoffs
Architecture Mechanism Primary Benefit Best For
Linear Pipelines Sequential text passing Low engineering overhead Single-domain,
between fixed nodes. and rapid prototyping. low-complexity
generative tasks.
DAG Graph-based parallel Cycle prevention and Multi-agent workflows
Orchestration execution with file- strict context isolation. requiring high reliability.
bus state passing via
schema references.
Capability Swappable, version- Rapid persona Role-based
Profiles controlled parameter switching with lifecycle deployment and
and tool bundles. memory purging. domain-specific agents.
Table 3: Architectural Tradeoffs among Linear Pipelines, DAG Orchestration, and Capability Profiles in multi-
agent skill systems.
May 2026 41
Agent Skills
Actionable Best Practices
• Write Software, Not Rules: Replace negative LLM instructions with deterministic
software constraints that make invalid actions impossible.
• Implement Progressive Disclosure: Load complex instructions dynamically only when
the skill is explicitly invoked.
• Decouple State: Never use the LLM context window as a database. Pass only URIs or
pointers to the subagents via the file system or message bus.
8. How to Decide Among the Hundreds
of Skills That Exist
By early 2026, public skill marketplaces had crossed 40,000 listings, with the leading
platform reporting tens of thousands of new skills published in the first weeks of January
alone. At Google Cloud Next 2026, Google launched its official Agent Skills repository at
github.com/google/skills, with skills installable via npx skills install github.
com/google/skills for use across Antigravity CLI, and any other coding agent that
supports the Skills standard. The Anthropic skills repository, the Google ADK skill library, the
Google official skills repository, and community marketplaces such as awesome-llm-apps
now host more skills than any practitioner could review individually. The selection problem is
real and growing.
Three heuristics help.
1. First, prefer first-party skills for vendor-specific tools. Google's BigQuery skill, the official
Stripe skill, anything written by the people who built the underlying system. They will be
more correct and more maintained than community alternatives.
May 2026 42
Agent Skills
2. Second, pin everything you depend on. Community skills evolve, and an unpinned
dependency that worked yesterday can fail tomorrow.
3. Third, audit before adopting. A skill is code that runs in your context. Treat it like any other
dependency, with the same supply-chain hygiene.
Not all sources are equal. Three categories of skill source exist in early 2026, and the right
operational stance is different for each:
Source Trust default Examples Who maintains it
First-party vendor Trust by default; google/agents-cli28, google/ The team that built the
skills pin a version skills29, google-gemini/gemini- underlying product
skills30, anthropics/skills31,
stripe/ai32, microsoft/skills33
Organization-curated Trust within your-org/retail-skills, your- Your own domain
skills the org; review org/finance-skills (private, teams, with PR review
on adoption internally maintained)
Community skills Audit before VoltAgent/awesome-agent- Volunteer authors,
adopting; skills34, SkillsMP marketplace35, varying
pin aggressively addyosmani/agent-skills36, maintenance
individual GitHub repos commitment
Table 4: Overview of Agent Skill sources categorized by trust defaults, official examples, and
maintenance ownership.
May 2026 43
Agent Skills

9. Conclusion
We began this whitepaper by looking at a surprisingly simple concept: a folder containing
a markdown file and a few optional scripts. Yet, this lightweight structure, the Agent Skill, is
fundamentally reshaping how we build AI Agents. It finally provides foundation models with
true, testable procedural memory, allowing them to remember how to execute tasks step-by-
step. By relying on the magic of progressive disclosure, skills solve the problem of context
rot. A single, general-purpose agent can now seamlessly access many specialized workflows
without choking its token budget.
The pattern we keep coming back to in this paper is that the format is deliberately small so
that the interesting work happens around it, not inside it. Evaluating Skills under realistic
co-loaded conditions is interesting. Composing Skills into workflows without using the
context window as a message bus is interesting. Letting agents draft Skills from successful
traces, with humans reviewing rather than authoring, is interesting. Encoding two decades
of institutional knowledge into a versioned, testable, governable library is interesting.
All of these are now tractable in a way they weren't twelve months ago, because the
primitive exists.
Throughout this paper, we have also tried to be specific about what's settled, what's still
emerging, and what's likely to change. The format is settled: agentskills.io is now an open
standard with adoption across every major coding agent, AI chatbot, and agent framework
that matters. The architecture around it is still emerging: evaluation under co-loaded
conditions, Skills-library-level optimization, agent-driven Skill creation, and the governance
patterns that make all of this safe at scale.
May 2026 44
Agent Skills
If you are starting today, our suggestion is the one we've made throughout: start small, start
with knowledge you already have, treat Skills as code, measure what you ship, and don't
reach for a multi-agent architecture when a Skills will do. The teams that figure this out now
will build cleaner systems than the teams that wait for the industry consensus to catch up.
The format is settled. The work is just beginning.
May 2026 45
Agent Skills
Appendix A – The Practical Cheatsheet
This section is designed to be printable and standalone. It compresses the rest of the
whitepaper into the decisions a team will face.
The minimal SKILL.md
Copy-paste this. Adjust the placeholders. Done.
---
name: skill-name
description: |
[What it does in one verb-led sentence.] Use this skill when the user
[trigger phrase 1], [trigger phrase 2], or [trigger phrase 3].
Do NOT use for [anti-trigger 1] or [anti-trigger 2].
version: 1.0.0
license: MIT
allowed-tools: [Optional] Read Bash Write
metadata:
author: [Optional] your-handle
---
# Skill Name
## When to use
- [Concrete scenario]
- [Concrete scenario]
## When NOT to use
- [Out-of-scope scenario]
## Workflow
1. [Step]
2. [Step]
3. See `references/advanced.md` for [edge case].
Continues next page...
May 2026 46
Agent Skills
## Examples
- Input: "..." → Output: "..."
## Output format
- Use `assets/template.md` etc.
## Anti-patterns to avoid
- Don't [...]
The folder structure
.
skill_name/
├── SKILL.md # Required: YAML frontmatter + markdown instructions
├── scripts/ # Optional: executable helper scripts (Python, Bash)
├── references/ # Optional: supplementary context loaded as needed
├── assets/ # Optional: files used in output (templates,resources)
├── ... # Any additional files or directories
Naming
• Directory name: snake_case
• Skill name: kebab-case
• Prefer gerund form: processing-pdfs, not pdf-processor
• Avoid generic names: helper, utils, tools, data
• Avoid vendor prefixes: claude-*, gemini-*, anthropic-*
• Avoid internal jargon outsiders won't recognize
May 2026 47
Agent Skills
The description field
The description is the routing algorithm. Spend more time here than anywhere else.
• State what it does AND when to use it
• Front-load trigger keywords ("Generate a commit message…", not "This skill helps with…")
• Include when NOT to use to prevent over-triggering
• Be pushy when the model under-triggers
• ≤200 chars for API; ≤1024 chars in YAML. Most authors aim for ~50 words
The five rules
1. One skill, one job. If you cannot describe what the skill does in one sentence, it is two
skills. Decompose before writing.
2. Descriptions are an interface. The agent picks skills by reading descriptions. A vague
description means an unused skill.
3. Skills are dependencies. Treat them like libraries. Version them, pin them, review them in
PRs. A skill without a test is a hope, not a capability.
4. The right team owns the right skill. Domain experts own domain skills. Do not let the AI
team become a bottleneck for the organization's domain knowledge.
5. The agent runtime is interchangeable. Do not tie skills to one runtime. Portability is part
of the value.
May 2026 48
Agent Skills
The quality principles
1. Run the task yourself first. Real failure produces signal. Speculation produces noise.
2. Give the reason, not just the rule. Models generalize wonderfully to edge cases when
they understand why an instruction exists. If you find yourself typing "ALWAYS" or
"NEVER" in caps, pause and try explaining the rationale instead.
3. Every line should earn its place. Keep gotchas, exact commands, business logic, anti-
patterns. Cut boilerplate the model already knows such as "always validate output".
4. One skill, one job. If the description needs "and" between unrelated capabilities, split it.
5. Make instructions verifiable. If the agent can't tell whether it followed the rule, the rule
is too vague.
6. Bundle what repeats. Helper code the agent keeps re-deriving belongs in scripts/.
Do's and Don'ts
Do:
• Start small and concrete
• Spend disproportionate time on the description field. It is the routing algorithm. Always
include what it does, when to use, and when not to use
• Trust progressive disclosure
• Bundle deterministic work in scripts/, not as instructions
• Treat Skills as code
May 2026 49
Agent Skills
• Remember: Skills + MCPs, not Skills vs. MCPs
• Have test cases and controlled, programmatic evaluation (see Section 4 for how to
actually do this)
Don't:
• Write vague descriptions like "helps with documents". Use specific verbs, trigger phrases,
and a when-not-to-use clause
• Write SKILL.md bodies over 5,000 words. Move detail to references/
• Hard-code paths or secrets
• Embed "always do X" rules that are more appropriate for AGENTS.md
• Install untrusted third-party libraries or Skills without scanning
• Reinvent MCP as scripts
Skill smells (revise if you see these)
• Over 5,000 words. Probably two skills, or reference material that should live
in references/
• Two domain teams could plausibly own it. Not yet decomposed. Split along
team boundaries
• You can't write three test cases for it. Description is too vague; skill does too
many things
• It does not reference any other resource. Might just be a long instruction that belongs
in the system prompt
May 2026 50
Agent Skills
• You keep adding "edge cases" sections. Each edge case probably wants its own skill
• Its description starts with "a helpful skill for…". Rewrite. The description should name
the trigger, the inputs, and the output
Eval coverage checklist
A skill is "evaluated" only when all four are satisfied:
• ☐ Trigger. Positive AND negative test cases. Target 90% trigger accuracy
• ☐ Execution. Correct outputs across a representative range of inputs
• ☐ Regression. Adding this skill causes zero drops in the existing library suite
• ☐ Token budget. Co-loaded with 5 to 15 frequently-active skills, does not degrade
unrelated turns
Any failure holds the skill at the draft tier, regardless of happy-path performance.
Deployment checklist
• ☐ Frontmatter validates (lint passes)
• ☐ Description includes what + when + when-not
• ☐ Scripts have unit tests passing in CI
• ☐ Eval suite passes in CI with min-pass threshold
• ☐ Security scan clean (no secrets, no untrusted deps)
May 2026 51
Agent Skills
• ☐ Description reviewed by someone other than the author
• ☐ Cross-tool install paths tested if shipping publicly
• ☐ Org-level admin provisioning updated (if applicable)
One-line mental model
System prompt = instinct. AGENTS.md = project README. Tools / MCP = hands. RAG =
library. Skills = the runbook the experienced colleague hands you on day one, and that
the AI never forgets.
Where to start tomorrow
1. Take your most experienced practitioner aside for an hour. Ask them to narrate three
workflows they do regularly. Record it.
2. Pick the most repeated workflow. Run the prompts yourself, without any skill loaded. Note
where the agent fails. Or let an agent similar to ()
3. Draft a SKILL.md from the transcript. Write three eval cases (two positive, one negative)
before drafting the body.
4. Ship to a read-only tier. Test in production-like conditions. Iterate the description until
trigger accuracy clears 90%.
Repeat. Build the library one workflow at a time. Resist the urge to let an LLM
generate fifty skills on day one.
May 2026 52
Agent Skills
Appendix B – Case Study: Domain
Expertise as Code (Vertical Skills
in Retail)
This section is the worked example of the whitepaper. It walks through how a large retailer
would structure a skills library to capture the institutional knowledge that differentiates the
brand from its competitors, and why that library, rather than any specific custom agent, is
the durable strategic asset. Several major retailers have publicly described AI assistants
with capabilities that match the architecture below. We describe the pattern, not the
implementation of any single vendor.
Why retail is the canonical case for skills
Two retailers running on the same agent runtime, accessing similar data through similar
APIs, will produce wildly different shopping experiences. Retail expertise is the kind of
knowledge that has historically been stuck in three places that AI systems have struggled to
reach: in the heads of senior buyers, merchandisers, and category managers; in thirty-page
operational runbooks that no one reads; and in Slack channels where the answer to "should
we recommend this product with that one?" lives in a thread from 2023.
Skills capture this knowledge in a form that the company's customer-facing systems will
actually use.
May 2026 53
Agent Skills
What the architecture looks like
Figure 11. A skills-first retail architecture (illustrative). Customer surfaces (web chat, mobile app, in-store
kiosk, voice agent) sit above an agent runtime that loads skills carrying merchandising, category, and
compliance knowledge. The tools below are accessed via MCP and managed search integrations.
May 2026 54
Agent Skills
The architecture has three layers. The top layer is the customer surface: chat on the website,
the mobile app, an in-store kiosk, a voice agent in the call center. Each surface is thin. It
forwards user input to the runtime and renders the response.
The middle layer is the agent runtime and the orchestrator that maintains the conversation,
loads skills, calls tools, and assembles the reply.
The bottom layer is the data and tools plane: the product catalog (often millions of SKUs),
live inventory with store-level location data, customer profile and order history, the project
knowledge base, and vector search over reviews, manuals, and specification sheets.
What matters for this whitepaper is the middle layer. The runtime itself is generic: Google's
Agent Development Kit, Anthropic's Claude Agent SDK, or any of the other runtimes that
support the open Skills standard. The skills loaded into that runtime are specific to the
retailer's domain, and they are what carry the brand's expertise to the customer.
An illustrative skills library
What does that library actually look like? Below is a representative set of skills a major home-
improvement retailer would plausibly maintain. Each is one folder. Each has a single owner.
Each has its own eval suite (using the patterns from Section 4). Together, they constitute the
company's working memory of how it serves customers.
• project-guidance. Encodes the trades' knowledge that turns a vague query ("how do I tile
a shower?") into a step-by-step plan. Includes structural dependencies (substrate must be
waterproofed before tiling), ordering logic (cuts before installation), and common-mistake
callouts. Owned by the trades knowledge team. Read-only tier.
May 2026 55
Agent Skills
• materials-list. Takes a project description (voice, text, or partial list) and produces a
grouped bill-of-materials, including items the contractor is likely to forget. Owned by Pro
merchandising. Draft-only tier: the customer reviews before purchasing.
• review-summarize. Condenses long product reviews into pros, cons, and common use
cases. Triggered when the customer asks about real-world experience with a product.
Owned by personalization. Read-only tier.
• delivery-window. Computes last-mile delivery options and ETAs given the customer's
location, the store's availability, and the company's freight network. Owned by fulfillment.
Read-only tier.
• return-policy. Encodes the company's return rules, including the dozens of exceptions
for special-order items, hazardous materials, custom cuts, and contract pricing. Owned
by customer service. Read-only tier. Promotion to action-allowed (e.g. issuing a refund)
requires a second skill with much tighter review.
Each one is small enough to be reviewed, tested, and shipped independently.
How does the same query route through the library
Consider what happens when a customer asks: "I want to remodel my kids' bathroom, what
do I need?"
The runtime loads the L1 descriptions of all skills at session start (~30 to 80 tokens each,
~2KB total). It identifies that project-guidance matches and loads its body, which produces
an outline of the renovation steps. If the customer follows up about delivery, the delivery-
window skill loads. If they ask about returns on a specific item, return-policy loads. The
previous skills can stay in context or be released as the conversation moves.
May 2026 56
Agent Skills
Notice what does not happen. There is no monolithic "remodeling assistant" agent that has
been trained on every possible remodeling scenario. Each piece of expertise is loaded into
context only when the conversation reaches it. The active context stays small. The available
capability is effectively unbounded.
Ownership: who writes which skill
The single most important governance decision a retailer makes about its skills library is who
owns each skill. The principle is to distribute ownership to the teams that already own the
underlying expertise:
Skill family Owner team Why
project-guidance, Trades knowledge / These teams hold the
product-fit category mgmt. merchandising and trade rules;
they edit them weekly anyway
materials-list Pro merchandising The Pro segment's specific BOM
logic is owned by the Pro team
delivery-window Store operations / fulfillment Real-time inventory and freight
rules change constantly; the team
that handles them owns the skill
review-summarize Personalization / data science Closest to the underlying NLP and
customer feedback signals
Table 5: Distributed ownership model mapping retail skill families to the domain teams responsible for their
underlying business logic.
May 2026 57
Agent Skills
The read / draft / act ladder
The second governance decision is what each skill is allowed to do. This is the same tier
model from Section 4, applied with retail-specific examples:
Tier Capability Review Examples
Read-Only May fetch, query, or Domain review-summarize,
describe data; cannot team approval store-locator,
mutate state project-guidance
Draft-Only May produce content Domain team + draft-customer-email,
for human review; format owner materials-list
cannot send or commit
Action-Allowed May execute irreversible Domain team + issue-refund,
operations on security/compliance send-customer-message,
real systems + executive sign-off reserve-inventory
Table 6: The read/draft/act governance ladder classifying skill capabilities, review requirements, and
operational examples.
This is far more defensible to a security team, and to the regulator who eventually shows
up, than the alternative: a black-box agent that does whatever its training plus its system
prompt produce.
Why is this harder to compete with than a custom agent
If the competitor and our retailer are both running on the same generic agent runtime (and
they are, because the runtime has commoditized), then matching the runtime is trivial. The
skills library encodes the company's accumulated patterns. This is the central strategic point
of the whitepaper.
May 2026 58
Agent Skills
A retailer that invests heavily in custom agents but neglects its skills library is investing in the
part of the stack that competitors will reach for free. A retailer that invests in skills, even on a
generic runtime, is building a durable asset that captures what the company actually knows.
Cold start: where to actually begin
A useful exercise: take the team's most experienced practitioner aside for an hour, ask them
to narrate three workflows they do regularly, and record the conversation. The transcript is,
almost literally, the first draft of three skills. This is the kind of work that, before skills, had no
obvious home. It now has one.
Ling, G., Zhong, S., & Huang, R. (2026). Agent Skills: A Data-Driven Analysis of Claude Skills
for Extending Large Language Model Functionality. arXiv:2602.08004. Analysis of 40,285
publicly listed skills from a major marketplace.
Google Cloud Blog. (2026, April). Level Up Your Agents: Announcing Google's Official Skills
Repository. https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/developers-practitioners/level-up-your-
agents-announcing-googles-official-skills-repository. Repository: https://github.com/
google/skills. Installable via `npx skills install github.com/google/skills` for Antigravity, and any
compliant coding agent.
May 2026 59
Agent Skills
Endnotes
1. https://codelabs.developers.google.com/getting-started-with-antigravity-skills?utm_
campaign=CDR_0xf9030db1_default_b513044940&utm_medium=external&utm_source=blog#0
2. https://github.com/anthropics/skills/tree/main/skills/skill-creator
3. https://hermes-agent.nousresearch.com/docs/user-guide/features/skills
4. https://github.com/Shubhamsaboo/awesome-llm-apps/tree/main/awesome_agent_skills
/self-improving-agent-skills
5. https://adk.dev/skills/
6. https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/equipping-agents-for-the-real-world-with-agent-skills
7. https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.12670
8. https://vercel.com/blog/agents-md-outperforms-skills-in-our-agent-evals
9. https://latitude.so/blog/agent-first-comparison-guide-vs-braintrust
10. https://adk.dev/evaluate/
11. https://arxiv.org/html/2411.13768v2
12. https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.16260
13. https://research.trychroma.com/context-rot
14. https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12045
15. https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.06112
16. https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.17087
17. https://google.github.io/agents-cli/
18. Liu, Zhao, Shang, and Shen (2026), reverse-engineering of Claude Code v2.1.88; companion site
ccunpacked.dev
19. Liu et al., “Lost in the Middle” (TACL 2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.06112
20. Chroma Research, “Context Rot” (2025). https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.17087
May 2026 60
Agent Skills
21. https://developers.googleblog.com/en/developers-guide-to-building-adk-agents-with-skills/
22. https://github.com/anthropics/skills
23. https://github.com/anthropics/skills/blob/main/skills/skill-creator/SKILL.md
24. https://github.com/Shubhamsaboo/awesome-llm-apps/tree/main/awesome_agent_skills/
self-improving-agent-skills
25. https://github.com/karpathy/autoresearch
26. https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291
27. https://github.com/philschmid/self-learning-skill
28. Google. (2026). Agents CLI: Unified CLI for the full ADK agent development lifecycle. https://google.
github.io/agents-cli/. Source repository: https://github.com/google/agents-cli. The framework ships
seven skills covering scaffold, build, eval, deploy, publish, and observability for agents built on Google
Cloud, designed to plug into any coding agent that supports the Agent Skills standard.
29. Google Cloud Blog. (2026, April). Level Up Your Agents: Announcing Google's Official Skills Repository.
https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/developers-practitioners/level-up-your-agents-announcing-
googles-official-skills-repository. Repository: https://github.com/google/skills. Installable via `npx skills
install github.com/google/skills` for Antigravity and any compliant coding agent.
30. Google Developers Blog. (2026, March). Closing the knowledge gap with agent skills. https://developers.
googleblog.com/closing-the-knowledge-gap-with-agent-skills/. Reports the Gemini API developer
skill improving Gemini 3.1 Pro from 28.2% to 96.6% on SDK code generation across 117 prompts. Source
skill: https://github.com/google-gemini/gemini-skills.
31. Anthropic. (2025-2026). anthropics/skills — Public repository for Agent Skills. https://github.com/
anthropics/skills. Contains Anthropic's reference implementation of the Skills standard plus example
skills for documents (docx, pdf, xlsx, pptx), MCP server building, and skill creation itself.
32. Stripe. (2026). stripe/ai — One-stop shop for building AI-powered products and businesses with Stripe.
https://github.com/stripe/ai. Includes the stripe-best-practices skill (skills/stripe-best-practices/SKILL.
md) for API selection, Connect setup, billing, and security; published and maintained by Stripe.
33. Microsoft. (2026). microsoft/skills — Skills, MCP servers, Custom Agents, Agents.md for SDKs to ground
Coding Agents. https://github.com/microsoft/skills. Microsoft's official skill collection for grounding
coding agents in Azure SDKs and Microsoft Foundry.
May 2026 61
Agent Skills
34. VoltAgent. (2026). awesome-agent-skills — A curated collection of 1000+ agent skills from official dev
teams and the community. https://github.com/VoltAgent/awesome-agent-skills. Features official skills
from Anthropic, Google Labs, Vercel, Stripe, Cloudflare, Netlify, Trail of Bits, Sentry, Expo, Hugging Face,
Figma, and others, alongside community-built skills. Compatible with Claude Code, Codex, Antigravity,
Cursor, GitHub Copilot, OpenCode, and Windsurf.
35. Skills Marketplace. (2026). https://skillsmp.com. An independent community-aggregated marketplace
of 1.2M+ skills sourced from public GitHub repositories, with semantic search, occupation filtering, and
minimum-quality indicators (2-star threshold). Marketplace operator explicitly recommends inspecting
community skills before installation.
36. Osmani, A. (2026). addyosmani/agent-skills — Production-grade engineering skills for AI coding
agents. https://github.com/addyosmani/agent-skills.
May 2026 62