Competition Rules
ENTRY IN THIS COMPETITION CONSTITUTES YOUR
ACCEPTANCE OF THESE OFFICIAL COMPETITION
RULES.
See Section 3.18 for defined terms
The Competition named below is a skills-based competition to promote and further the field of
data science. You must register via the Competition Website to enter. To enter the Competition,
you must agree to these Official Competition Rules, which incorporate by reference the
provisions and content of the Competition Website and any Specific Competition Rules herein
(collectively, the "Rules"). Please read these Rules carefully before entry to ensure you
understand and agree. You further agree that Submission in the Competition constitutes
agreement to these Rules. You may not submit to the Competition and are not eligible to receive
the prizes associated with this Competition unless you agree to these Rules. These Rules form a
binding legal agreement between you and the Competition Sponsor with respect to the
Competition. Your competition Submissions must conform to the requirements stated on the
Competition Website. Your Submissions will be scored based on the evaluation metric described
on the Competition Website. Subject to compliance with the Competition Rules, Prizes, if any,
will be awarded to Participants with the best scores, based on the merits of the data science
models submitted. See below for the complete Competition Rules. For Competitions designated
as hackathons by the Competition Sponsor (“Hackathons”), your Submissions will be judged by
the Competition Sponsor based on the evaluation rubric set forth on the Competition Website
(“Evaluation Rubric”). The Prizes, if any, will be awarded to Participants with the highest
ranking(s) as determined by the Competition Sponsor based on such rubric.
You cannot sign up to Kaggle from multiple accounts and therefore you cannot enter or
submit from multiple accounts.
1. COMPETITION-SPECIFIC TERMS
1. COMPETITION TITLE
Vibecoding Agents - Capstone Project
2. COMPETITION SPONSOR
Google
3. COMPETITION SPONSOR ADDRESS
1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy Mountain View, CA 94043
4. COMPETITION WEBSITE
4. COMPETITION WEBSITE
https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/vibecoding-agents-capstone-project
5. TOTAL PRIZES AVAILABLE: 12 pieces of swag, distributed equally across 4
categories: Agents for Good, Agents for Business, Concierge Agents, Freestyle.
6. WINNER LICENSE TYPE
CC-BY 4.0
7. DATA ACCESS AND USE
N/A
2. COMPETITION-SPECIFIC RULES
In addition to the provisions of the General Competition Rules below, you understand and agree
to these Competition-Specific Rules required by the Competition Sponsor:
1. TEAM LIMITS
a. The maximum Team size is five (5). b. Team mergers are allowed and can be performed by
the Team leader. In order to merge, the combined Team must have a total Submission count less
than or equal to the maximum allowed as of the Team Merger Deadline. The maximum allowed
is the number of Submissions per day multiplied by the number of days the competition has been
running. For Hackathons, each team is allowed one (1) Submission; any Submissions submitted
by Participants before merging into a Team will be unsubmitted.
2. SUBMISSION LIMITS
a. For Hackathons, each Team may submit one (1) Submission only.
3. COMPETITION TIMELINE
a. Competition Timeline dates (including Entry Deadline, Final Submission Deadline, Start Date,
and Team Merger Deadline, as applicable) are reflected on the competition’s Overview >
Timeline page.
4. COMPETITION DATA
a. Data Access and Use.
1 1 None. Competition Data will not be provided by Competition Sponsor for
this Competition.
b. Data Security.
1 1 You agree to use reasonable and suitable measures to prevent persons who
have not formally agreed to these Rules from gaining access to the Competition Data.
You agree not to transmit, duplicate, publish, redistribute or otherwise provide or make
available the Competition Data to any party not participating in the Competition. You
agree to notify Kaggle immediately upon learning of any possible unauthorized
transmission of or unauthorized access to the Competition Data and agree to work with
Kaggle to rectify any unauthorized transmission or access.
1 1 You agree to use reasonable and suitable measures to prevent persons who
have not formally agreed to these Rules from gaining access to the Competition Data.
You agree not to transmit, duplicate, publish, redistribute or otherwise provide or make
available the Competition Data to any party not participating in the Competition. You
agree to notify Kaggle immediately upon learning of any possible unauthorized
transmission of or unauthorized access to the Competition Data and agree to work with
Kaggle to rectify any unauthorized transmission or access.
5. WINNER LICENSE
a. Under Section 2.8 (Winners Obligations) of the General Rules below, you hereby grant and
will grant the Competition Sponsor the following license(s) with respect to your Submission if
you are a Competition winner:
1 1 Open Source: You hereby license and will license your winning
Submission and the source code used to generate the Submission under CC-BY 4.0, an
Open Source Initiative-approved license (see www.opensource.org) that in no event
limits commercial use of such code or model containing or depending on such code.
2 2 For generally commercially available software that you used to generate
your Submission that is not owned by you, but that can be procured by the Competition
Sponsor without undue expense, you do not need to grant the license in the preceding
Section for that software.
3 3 In the event that input data or pretrained models with an incompatible
license are used to generate your winning solution, you do not need to grant an open
source license in the preceding Section for that data and/or model(s).
b. You may be required by the Sponsor to provide a detailed description of how the winning
Submission was generated, to the Competition Sponsor’s specifications, as outlined in Section
2.8, Winner’s Obligations. This may include a detailed description of methodology, where one
must be able to reproduce the approach by reading the description, and includes a detailed
explanation of the architecture, preprocessing, loss function, training details, hyper-parameters,
etc. The description should also include a link to a code repository with complete and detailed
instructions so that the results obtained can be reproduced.
6. EXTERNAL DATA AND TOOLS
a. You may use data other than the Competition Data (“External Data”) to develop and test your
Submissions. However, you will ensure the External Data is either publicly available and equally
accessible to use by all Participants of the Competition for purposes of the competition at no cost
to the other Participants, or satisfies the Reasonableness criteria as outlined in Section 2.6.b
below. The ability to use External Data under this Section does not limit your other obligations
under these Competition Rules, including but not limited to Section 2.8 (Winners Obligations).
b. The use of external data and models is acceptable unless specifically prohibited by the Host.
Because of the potential costs or restrictions (e.g., “geo restrictions”) associated with obtaining
rights to use external data or certain software and associated tools, their use must be “reasonably
accessible to all” and of “minimal cost”. Also, regardless of the cost challenges as they might
affect all Participants during the course of the competition, the costs of potentially procuring a
license for software used to generate a Submission, must also be considered. The Host will
employ an assessment of whether or not the following criteria can exclude the use of the
particular LLM, data set(s), or tool(s):
b. The use of external data and models is acceptable unless specifically prohibited by the Host.
Because of the potential costs or restrictions (e.g., “geo restrictions”) associated with obtaining
rights to use external data or certain software and associated tools, their use must be “reasonably
accessible to all” and of “minimal cost”. Also, regardless of the cost challenges as they might
affect all Participants during the course of the competition, the costs of potentially procuring a
license for software used to generate a Submission, must also be considered. The Host will
employ an assessment of whether or not the following criteria can exclude the use of the
particular LLM, data set(s), or tool(s):
1 1 Are Participants being excluded from a competition because of the
"excessive" costs for access to certain LLMs, external data, or tools that might be used by
other Participants. The Host will assess the excessive cost concern by applying a
“Reasonableness” standard (the “Reasonableness Standard”). The Reasonableness
Standard will be determined and applied by the Host in light of things like cost thresholds
and accessibility.
2 2 By way of example only, a small subscription charge to use additional
elements of a large language model such as Gemini Advanced are acceptable if meeting
the Reasonableness Standard of Sec. 8.2. Purchasing a license to use a proprietary dataset
that exceeds the cost of a prize in the competition would not be considered reasonable.
c. Automated Machine Learning Tools (“AMLT”)
1 1 Individual Participants and Teams may use automated machine learning
tool(s) (“AMLT”) (e.g., Google toML, H2O Driverless AI, etc.) to create a Submission,
provided that the Participant or Team ensures that they have an appropriate license to the
AMLT such that they are able to comply with the Competition Rules.
7. ELIGIBILITY
a. Unless otherwise stated in the Competition-Specific Rules above or prohibited by internal
policies of the Competition Entities, employees, interns, contractors, officers and directors of
Competition Entities may enter and participate in the Competition, but are not eligible to win any
Prizes. "Competition Entities" means the Competition Sponsor, Kaggle Inc., and their respective
parent companies, subsidiaries and affiliates. If you are such a Participant from a Competition
Entity, you are subject to all applicable internal policies of your employer with respect to your
participation.
8. WINNER’S OBLIGATIONS
a. As a condition to being awarded a Prize, a Prize winner must fulfill the following obligations:
1 1 Deliver to the Competition Sponsor the final model's software code as
used to generate the winning Submission and associated documentation. The delivered
software code should follow these documentation guidelines, must be capable of
generating the winning Submission, and contain a description of resources required to
build and/or run the executable code successfully. For avoidance of doubt, delivered
software code should include training code, inference code, and a description of the
required computational environment. For Hackathons, the Submission deliverables will
be as described on the Competition Website, which may be information or materials that
are not software code.
a. To the extent that the final model’s software code includes generally commercially available
software that is not owned by you, but that can be procured by the Competition Sponsor without
undue expense, then instead of delivering the code for that software to the Competition Sponsor,
you must identify that software, method for procuring it, and any parameters or other information
necessary to replicate the winning Submission; Individual Participants and Teams who create a
Submission using an AMLT may win a Prize. However, for clarity, the potential winner’s
Submission must still meet the requirements of these Rules, including but not limited to Section
2.5 (Winners License), Section 2.8 (Winners Obligations), and Section 3.14 (Warranty,
Indemnity, and Release).”
a. To the extent that the final model’s software code includes generally commercially available
software that is not owned by you, but that can be procured by the Competition Sponsor without
undue expense, then instead of delivering the code for that software to the Competition Sponsor,
you must identify that software, method for procuring it, and any parameters or other information
necessary to replicate the winning Submission; Individual Participants and Teams who create a
Submission using an AMLT may win a Prize. However, for clarity, the potential winner’s
Submission must still meet the requirements of these Rules, including but not limited to Section
2.5 (Winners License), Section 2.8 (Winners Obligations), and Section 3.14 (Warranty,
Indemnity, and Release).”
b. Individual Participants and Teams who create a Submission using an AMLT may win a Prize.
However, for clarity, the potential winner’s Submission must still meet the requirements of these
Rules,
1 1 Grant to the Competition Sponsor the license to the winning Submission
stated in the Competition Specific Rules above, and represent that you have the
unrestricted right to grant that license;
2 2 Sign and return all Prize acceptance documents as may be required by
Competition Sponsor or Kaggle, including without limitation: (a) eligibility certifications;
(b) licenses, releases and other agreements required under the Rules; and (c) U.S. tax
forms (such as IRS Form W-9 if U.S. resident, IRS Form W-8BEN if foreign resident, or
future equivalents).
9. GOVERNING LAW
a. Unless otherwise provided in the Competition Specific Rules above, all claims arising out of
or relating to these Rules will be governed by California law, excluding its conflict of laws rules,
and will be litigated exclusively in the Federal or State courts of Santa Clara County, California,
USA. The parties consent to personal jurisdiction in those courts. If any provision of these Rules
is held to be invalid or unenforceable, all remaining provisions of the Rules will remain in full
force and effect.
Kaggle Competition Foundational Rules
(Non-editable)
Competition participants must also agree to Kaggle's Foundational Competition Rules. These
rules will supersede the competition-specific rules in the event of any conflict.
The following Kaggle Competition Foundational Rules (“ Foundational Rules ”) apply to every
competition regardless of whether the Sponsor creates competition-specific rules. Any
competition-specific rules provided by the Sponsor are in addition to these rules, and in the case
of any conflict or inconsistency, these Foundational Rules control and nullify contrary
competition-specific rules.
GENERAL COMPETITION RULES - BINDING AGREEMENT
GENERAL COMPETITION RULES - BINDING AGREEMENT
1. ELIGIBILITY
a. To be eligible to enter the Competition, you must be:
1 1 a registered account holder at Kaggle.com;
2 2 the older of 18 years old or the age of majority in your jurisdiction of
residence (unless otherwise agreed to by Competition Sponsor and appropriate parental/
guardian consents have been obtained by Competition Sponsor);
3 3 not a resident of Crimea, so-called Donetsk People's Republic (DNR) or
Luhansk People's Republic