Introduction
Software engineering is undergoing its most significant transformation since the introduction
of high-level programming languages. The most profound shift is the transition from
writing code to expressing intent, trusting intelligent systems to translate that intent into
working software.1 This new paradigm spans a spectrum: from casual "vibe coding", where
a developer describes what they want in natural language and accepts whatever the AI
generates, to disciplined "agentic engineering", where AI acts as an implementation engine
within carefully designed constraints.2
May 2026 6
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
While this high-velocity, intent-driven development drastically accelerates innovation, it
shatters traditional paradigms of trust. In deterministic software, trust is binary: the code
compiles, the tests pass, and the static credentials are valid. In an agentic system, an
autonomous workforce possesses the ambient agency to execute generated code, access
sensitive internal APIs, and dynamically modify production environments.
To operationalise vibe coding in the enterprise, we must redefine trust across two distinct
axes: Security and Evaluation.
• Security tells you if the agent stayed inside the boundary, ensuring it operates safely and
without malicious intent.
• Evaluation tells you whether what happened inside that boundary is actually
worth shipping.
A vibe-coded agent can pass every security check and still fundamentally misread the
developer's intent, ignore project conventions, or silently degrade user experience. This
whitepaper provides the definitive 2026 framework for both: establishing the strict "safety
harness" required to secure non-deterministic agents, and opening the "glass box" to
rigorously measure the quality, efficiency, and alignment of their internal reasoning.
Security: The Evolution to Secure
Agentic Development
As noted in a Mandiant special report for Google Cloud, "adversaries have moved beyond
the simple use of large language models to draft phishing content and are now deploying
adaptive tools capable of rewriting code."3 Broad threat intelligence trends show adversaries
continuously adapting their initial access vectors to exploit the new paradigm.4
May 2026 7
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Intent-driven development drastically accelerates innovation but introduces unprecedented
security vulnerabilities. We are no longer simply securing web applications against traditional
exploits; we are tasked with securing a non-human workforce that possesses the ambient
agency to execute generated code, access sensitive internal APIs, and dynamically modify
production environments.
Traditional software testing and security models rely on deterministic logic, where a fixed
set of inputs produces a predictable output. However, in an agentic system, an agent
might possess a valid access token but operate autonomously with misaligned intent.
A critical realisation is that a raw AI model is not an agent. It only becomes one when
wrapped in a "harness"—the scaffolding that gives it state, tool execution, feedback loops,
and enforceable constraints. Securing this new paradigm requires shifting our focus from
securing code syntax to securing this harness.
In this fluid, non-deterministic environment, static identity acts as a poor perimeter. Trust
can no longer be a gate an agent passes through once during deployment; it must be
continuously earned, verified, and dynamically enforced based on runtime context. We define
this ongoing assurance as Effective Trust—a continuous metric evaluated across an agent's
supply chain, identity, runtime behaviour, and contextual associations.
To achieve this continuous Effective Trust and secure the chaotic reality of vibe coding, we
have developed a layered defence-in-depth architecture. As illustrated below, this framework
builds upon a strict 7-pillar foundational baseline, extends into high-velocity execution
controls, and is crowned by active, agentic defence mechanisms.
May 2026 8
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Figure 1: The Secure Vibe Coding Agent Framework. This layered architecture differentiates the foundational
security controls required to safely host an autonomous agent (The 7 Pillars) from the high-velocity, intent-
driven defences needed to secure its dynamic code execution and runtime behaviour.
The following sections will deconstruct this architecture layer by layer, beginning with the
baseline security harness.
The Foundation: The 7-Pillar Agent Security Architecture
In traditional enterprise environments, security is deterministic. Applications rely on
predictable code syntax, and access is governed by static Identity-as-a-Perimeter models,
such as Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). If a user or service account has the correct
authorisation token, the system implicitly trusts the execution path.
May 2026 9
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
The agentic environment fundamentally disrupts this model. Because everyday agent failures
often trace back to a missing tool, a vague rule, or an absent guardrail, organisations must
shift to a "Context-as-a-Perimeter" model. Because we must assume the underlying model
could fail or be compromised, security cannot reside solely within the AI itself. Instead, we
must enforce a strict, external "safety envelope" spanning multiple disciplines.
We split this baseline architecture into seven distinct pillars, establishing the mandatory
foundation that forms the secure harness for any autonomous system:
• Pillar 1 - Infrastructure & Networking: Cloud Infrastructure Engineers must secure the
foundational environment against upstream poisoning and container escapes. Because
the harness must dictate where the agent's code actually runs and what it cannot reach,
we isolate runtime execution within ephemeral, kernel-level sandboxes (such as gVisor).
Furthermore, strict network egress governance guarantees that agent-generated data
travels only through authorised, offline caches or explicit internal proxies, preventing
inadvertent public exfiltration.
• Pillar 2 - Data: Data Architects face the threat of agents leaking sensitive information
from their context windows or ingesting poisoned RAG data. The practice of "context
engineering" provides agents with rich, structured information about codebases and
intent. To protect this sensitive context, data at rest is secured using Customer-Managed
Encryption Keys (CMEK), whilst data in transit is protected via mutual TLS (mTLS). Crucially,
data access must be strictly scoped down to enforce the principle of least privilege.
Furthermore, long-term memory stores—particularly Vector Databases—must enforce
strict tenant partitioning to prevent Cross-Tenant Vector Poisoning, ensuring that a
malicious payload ingested by one tenant cannot be retrieved during another tenant's
similarity search.
May 2026 10
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
• Pillar 3 - Model: AI Engineers must defend the core application logic against semantic
attacks that subvert the model's instructions. In agentic workflows, the prompt and the
"Instructions and Rule Files" that define what the agent is forbidden from doing serve as
the new source code. Securing this pillar requires treating the model's system instructions
and prompt templates as highly sensitive, cryptographically attested artifacts.
• Pillar 4 - Application & Runtime: Agent developers must secure the agent's autonomy as
it executes logic and utilises tools. Because agents operate interactively, traditional rules-
based firewalls are insufficient. We deploy LLM firewalls for dynamic prompt and response
filtering, alongside deterministic "hooks" that run at specific lifecycle points, such as
before a tool call or after a file edit. Centralised Agent Gateways act as the ecosystem's
bouncers, governing Agent-to-Agent (A2A) orchestration to prevent unauthorised
lateral movement.
• Pillar 5 - Identity and Access Management (IAM): Identity Administrators are tasked
with cryptographically verifying exactly who is interacting with the system. The major
risk is the "Confused Deputy" problem, where an over-privileged agent is tricked into
executing unauthorised commands. We resolve this by assigning unique, cryptographic
identities (such as SPIFFE IDs) to every agent. Access relies on Attribute-Based Access
Control (ABAC) and Just-In-Time (JIT) token downscoping. This enforces a strict
permissions matrix of Intent × User × Time, ensuring agents receive fresh, hyper-restricted
credentials that expire immediately after a task concludes.
• Pillar 6 - Observability & Security Ops: Security Operations teams must combat
"invisible failures" where an agent quietly cascades into an infinite reasoning loop. Without
observability—including logs, traces, and metering—there is no way to tell whether an
agent is doing well or quietly drifting. We resolve this by deploying an autonomous SecOps
triad: the Blue Team utilises OpenTelemetry and Agent Behavioural Analytics (ABA), the
Red Team proactively simulates multi-hop attacks, and the Green Team executes "Stateful
Quarantines" if an anomaly is detected.
May 2026 11
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
• Pillar 7 - Governance: Governance and Compliance Officers must ensure that
autonomous decisions meet rigorous regulatory standards. Beyond traditional data
frameworks, governance must now strictly adhere to the EU AI Act, mandating Algorithmic
Impact Assessments for high-risk autonomous agents to manage the legal liabilities of
automated decision-making. To satisfy these requirements, agentic governance requires
continuous oversight and risk prioritisation—understanding exactly which autonomous
workflows carry the highest business impact if compromised, and securing those first. By
leveraging the observability and identity pillars, organisations must create an immutable
audit trail that strictly attributes every real-world action back to a specific agent and the
human who deployed or approved it. Furthermore, if generated code compiles without
errors, developers often assume it is safe. We resolve this by replacing simple approval
buttons with mandatory "Logic Reviews," translating complex syntax back into plain
language. We utilise Risk-Stratified Attestation to bind digital signatures to the agent's
outputs, creating a transparent ledger for internal governance and third-party audits.
This 7-pillar architecture provides the universal baseline required to securely graduate
an AI model into a functioning enterprise agent. However, theoretical frameworks must
survive contact with reality. In practice, modern developers operate fluidly between acting
as a hands-on "conductor" and an asynchronous "orchestrator". When this high-speed
workflow collides with complex legacy environments, specific threat vectors emerge—from
hallucinated software dependencies to inadvertently bypassed authentication flows. In the
following sections, we will deep-dive into how these generic security principles are practically
applied to tame the chaotic, high-velocity realities of vibe coding.
May 2026 12
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Sandboxes and Supply Chain Defence (Pillars 1 & 4)
The core mechanism of vibe coding relies on dynamically translating human intent into
executable logic on the fly. However, vibe-coded agents rarely write perfect code on their
first attempt. The reality of intent-driven development is a high-speed, iterative cycle: the
agent writes a script, executes it, reads the resulting error logs, and autonomously rewrites
the logic until it aligns with the user's vibe. Because this generative process introduces
high variability, the resulting code cannot be implicitly trusted. Running these dynamically
generated scripts directly alongside the root agent or on standard host infrastructure
introduces an unacceptable level of risk.
Ephemeral Sandboxing and State Management
To safely harness this high-velocity "vibe loop," any skill-generated code must first execute
within an ephemeral, network-isolated sandbox. Sub-agents designed to execute untrusted
code or invoke tools must run in hardened environments, such as dedicated containers,
virtual machines, or kernel-level environments like gVisor.
Crucially, these sandboxes are not merely "prisons" for malicious payloads; they must actively
block raw host access and completely reset their state between runs. This ensures that
even if a vibe-coded script contains a severe vulnerability or is manipulated into a container
escape attempt, the compromised logic cannot persist or impact the underlying host node
while the agent safely iterates on its solution.
May 2026 13
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Mitigating Hallucinated Packages
Agentic code generation introduces a highly specific and dangerous supply chain
vulnerability: large language models frequently hallucinate software packages that do
not exist. Malicious actors actively monitor developer forums and AI outputs for these
hallucinations, proactively publishing malware under those exact fake names. Because
autonomous agents can alter dependency graphs without human confirmation, a single
hallucination can pull malware directly into the build environment.
According to Wiz's research on vibe coding, attackers actively exploit the tendency of
language models to hallucinate dependency names: they upload malicious packages using
these fabricated names so that automated agents will inadvertently download them, a
technique Wiz refers to as "slopsquatting."5 Instead, agents must source dependencies
exclusively from vetted providers or internal enterprise registries, whilst enforcing strict
cryptographic version pinning. As a final defensive pillar , CI/CD pipelines must automatically
verify Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) entries and digital signatures before any artifacts
advance to production, acting as a definitive gate using Binary Authorisation.
Egress Governance and Non-Interactive Access
While kernel-level isolation protects the host infrastructure, organisations must also secure
the network boundary. In traditional software, outbound network traffic is highly predictable.
In vibe-coded systems, egress is non-deterministic because it is driven by the dynamic usage
of newly generated tools.
May 2026 14
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
A common failure mode in vibe coding is the agent inadvertently attempting to push
unverified code to live environments, or exfiltrating sensitive data. However, relying on a
simple allowlist of approved domains is insufficient. An allowlist cannot secure an agent
against indirect prompt injections hidden within third-party web pages.
To mitigate this risk, agents must be restricted to non-interactive internet access.
Administrators should force the agent to fetch external information exclusively through
offline caches or dedicated, pre-sanitised web-crawling services. By forcing all data to travel
strictly through governed pathways, organisations prevent the agent from interacting directly
with malicious payloads or inadvertently downloading typosquatted packages while fulfilling
the user's intent.
While securing the execution environment and the supply chain ensures that an agent
operates within a safely contained perimeter, a perfect sandbox does not prevent an
agent from writing fundamentally flawed code or connecting to a malicious internal tool.
To truly secure the output of this high-speed workflow, we must elevate our focus from the
infrastructure to the application pillar itself.
Vibe-Coding Specifics: Securing Application Logic (Pillar 4)
Because vibe coding inherently prioritises immediate functionality over secure design, the
resulting generated applications frequently contain severe structural flaws. Users often
implicitly trust the generated code simply because it compiles and runs without errors,
blinding them to the fact that the application may have completely bypassed standard
backend security controls.
May 2026 15
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Application Vulnerabilities
When developers use AI to rapidly build applications, the resulting code tends to fail in two
predictable ways: it trusts the browser too much, and it leaves the backend wide open.
First, AI generation usually takes the path of least resistance by handling sensitive operations
on the frontend. Instead of routing things through a secure server, the generated code often
dumps API keys, password validation, and user session flags directly into the client side. This
means anyone who opens their browser's developer tools can easily read those credentials
or manipulate their access level without ever needing a real password.
Second, the speed of building these apps tends to outpace the setup of invisible security
layers. AI tools are great at connecting a database or spinning up an admin dashboard, but
they rarely enable the strict, default-deny access controls needed to actually protect them.
As a result, basic things like row-level database security get skipped, leaving private user
data and internal staging environments completely exposed to the public internet.
Reconciling IDE Friction with CI/CD Enforcement
To catch these structural flaws, we must balance developer velocity with strict security
enforcement. Attempting to aggressively hard-block insecure prompts directly within the
developer's IDE is easily bypassed and can cause excessive friction for benign developers
trying to iterate on complex logic.
Instead, "shifting left" should be implemented via Developer Advisory Linters in the IDE
to provide real-time guidance, while the unyielding security enforcement is pushed to
deterministic checks within the CI/CD pipeline. Integrating Static Application Security Testing
May 2026 16
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
(SAST) and Software Composition Analysis (SCA) into the pipeline ensures that all generated
application logic is deterministically scanned for vulnerable dependencies and structural
flaws before the code ever reaches production.
MCP Spoofing and Contextual Authorisation
Once the vibe-coded application logic is deployed, security controls must govern how
the agent interacts with external systems. Agents increasingly rely on tool coordination
frameworks, such as the Model Context Protocol (MCP), which allow them to discover and
connect to external or internal enterprise servers at runtime.
This introduces a critical threat vector: a forged or compromised server can pose as a
legitimate MCP tool to inject payloads or demand excessive privileges. Because agents
operate autonomously, they may execute malicious commands supplied by these spoofed
servers before any human intervention occurs.
To secure Agent-to-Tool and Agent-to-Agent (A2A) orchestration, organisations must deploy
a runtime LLM firewall in front of the active agent to dynamically intercept opportunistic
prompt injections. Furthermore, a Centralised Agent Gateway must evaluate Contextual
Authorisation—acting as the enforcer for the 'Association' trust factor by dynamically
verifying if an agent's request to call a tool perfectly aligns with the developer's original
intent. By routing all invocations through this governed entry and exit point, the architecture
prevents unauthorised lateral movement when an agent attempts to connect with
internal tools.
By routing all tool invocations through a Centralised Agent Gateway, we successfully limit the
agent's ability to execute unauthorised actions at the runtime pillar . However, the integrity
of these decisions ultimately relies on how we verify the actor behind the agent, manage
May 2026 17
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
credentials under pressure, and establish human control over high-risk actions. This shifts
the security boundary from application orchestration to the cryptographic verification of
identity and the mechanics of human authorisation.
Identity, Trust & High-Stakes Actions (Pillar 5)
Because developers often use vague or highly abstracted natural language to generate
code (for example, "fix the backend routing"), the resulting agentic workflows are inherently
broad. Granting these autonomous agents shared, long-lived service identities creates an
unmanageable internal threat vector. To secure this pillar , organisations must assign unique,
cryptographic identities (such as SPIFFE IDs) to every individual agent.
The Confused Deputy and Delegated vs. Agentic Identity
Even with a unique identity, a vibe-coded agent remains highly susceptible to the Confused
Deputy problem. This occurs when a prompt injection—such as a malicious instruction
hidden inside an open-source repository that a developer unknowingly pasted into their IDE's
context window—tricks an over-privileged agent into executing an unauthorised command on
the attacker's behalf.
To resolve this, an agent must never be the final arbiter of access. Instead of operating
under the human user's delegated credentials, which grants the agent dangerous ambient
access, the agent must authenticate using a dedicated identity explicitly tagged as agentic.
A distinct, observable agentic identity ensures that its permissions remain strictly bound and
subject to granular audit logs.
May 2026 18
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Zero Ambient Authority and JIT Downscoping
Building on this, the architecture must enforce Zero Ambient Authority. An agent executing
a "vibe" must never inherit the developer's full, ambient administrative privileges. Instead, the
system relies on Just-In-Time (JIT) token downscoping.
When an agent dynamically writes a new script or skill to solve a task, the execution sandbox
receives fresh, hyper-restricted credentials explicitly scoped to the exact data sources
required for that specific script, rather than inheriting its parent agent's broad permissions.
Furthermore, administrators must enforce file-tree allowlists that confine read and write
operations to specific project directories, utilising deny-by-default rules to block access
to secrets, build scripts, and production manifests. These downscoped tokens are highly
ephemeral and expire the exact moment the task concludes.
Elicitation, MFA Challenges, and the "Vibe Diff"
While automated identity constraints handle the majority of routine tasks, high-stakes
actions—such as modifying production databases, executing financial transfers, or altering
IAM configurations—require explicit verification and cannot rely on simple "approve/deny"
buttons. Because vibe coders often rely on the AI to write complex syntax they may not fully
understand (the "It Works, Ship It" fallacy), simple approval gates quickly cause confirmation
fatigue, leading developers to blindly authorise code they do not comprehend.
To combat this, the system must implement structured, context-aware elicitation. The agent
is forced to actively request confirmation based on the specific context of a high-risk action,
which must be accompanied by two distinct security boundaries:
May 2026 19
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
• Cryptographic Hardware MFA: The system should mandate physical multi-factor
authentication challenges, such as requiring the developer to touch a hardware USB
security key to cryptographically approve the execution.
• The Vibe Diff: Before a critical tool runs, an Evaluator Quorum intercepts the request and
translates the complex, generated code back into a plain-English summary. This "Vibe
Diff" shows the human developer exactly how their original, fuzzy intent maps to the
proposed execution steps, ensuring the human operator actually understands what they
are authorising before providing explicit cryptographic consent.
Even with perfect identity verification and granular human authorisation, malicious
instructions can still slip past initial defences. When developers blindly trust open-source
repositories or pull in massive blocks of unstructured context, they invite sophisticated
semantic attacks that bypass standard IAM controls. To proactively detect and neutralise
these hidden threats as the code is being generated, security operations must evolve to
match the exact speed of the agentic workflow.
Red, Blue, and Green Security Teaming (Pillar 6)
In a vibe-coded environment, application logic is generated, executed, and discarded at
an unprecedented velocity. Because the attack surface is non-deterministic and driven by
natural language, traditional, manual security operations simply cannot scale to keep pace.
To secure autonomous systems, the security operations themselves must become agentic,
requiring the deployment of a continuous, AI-driven triad of Red, Blue, and Green teaming
running in parallel with the developer's workflow.
May 2026 20
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Invisible Payloads and Repository Poisoning
Before deploying defensive operations, we must understand the stealthy nature of agentic
threats. Repositories themselves act as a highly effective attack vector. Threat actors can
compromise repositories by inserting zero-width Unicode characters or homoglyphs directly
into the codebase. Knostic warns that these "invisible payloads hide in plain sight and bypass
human review". Because agents manipulate and replicate code much faster than a human
developer, a single hidden payload can "spread across hundreds of files in minutes" before
anyone notices.6
The Red Team (Agent Attacker): Injecting Adversarial Vibes
Passive monitoring is fundamentally reactive. To uncover semantic vulnerabilities and invisible
payloads before external adversaries do, organisations must deploy Virtual Red-Teaming
Agents. Rather than running static penetration tests, the Agent Attacker proactively injects
"Adversarial Vibes".
This involves dynamically crafting sophisticated roleplay jailbreaks and burying hidden,
malicious instructions inside massive blocks of RAG context or dummy forum posts that
developers frequently paste into their IDEs. The Red Team actively tests whether the
target enterprise agent gets distracted by the poisoned context and hallucinates an
insecure solution.
May 2026 21
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
The Blue Team (Agent Defender): Behavioural Analytics
Functioning as the active monitoring pillar , the automated Blue Team replaces traditional
User and Entity Behaviour Analytics (UEBA), which are ineffective for non-deterministic
AI. Instead, the Agent Defender relies on Agent Behavioural Analytics (ABA) to baseline
expected execution paths and detect AI-specific anomalies.
It continuously monitors the agent's Runtime Agent Bill of Materials (AgBOM)—a dynamic
inventory of the tools, models, and data sources the agent is actively using at any given
millisecond. If an agent's logic begins to drift—for example, if a vibe-coded script suddenly
begins querying an unusual number of external tools or enters an unbounded resource
loop—the ABA engine immediately flags the deviation.
The Green Team (Agent Fixer): Quarantine and Auto-Refactoring
When the Blue Team detects a compromised agent, traditional incident response methods—
such as aggressively killing the host container—are highly disruptive and dangerous.
Terminating an agent mid-thought can leave connected APIs in a corrupted state. Instead,
the automated Green Team executes a "Stateful Quarantine" via SOAR playbooks. This
gracefully revokes the agent's specific tool access, freezing its ability to act upon the world
while preserving its short-term memory entirely intact for forensic analysis.
Furthermore, the Green Team goes a step further by performing Auto-Refactoring.
Leveraging the system's innate capacity for self-repair, the Agent Fixer autonomously
rewrites the insecure, vibe-coded script to patch the vulnerability. It then presents the
secure, alternative code back to the developer directly within their IDE, requiring no manual
human intervention to formulate the fix.
May 2026 22
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Integrating the Triad and Enforcing Small Batch Sizes
To prevent agents from generating massive, unreviewable code modifications during this
process, developers must restrict agent output to small batch sizes. This is ideally achieved
using a test-driven loop where the system blocks the agent from modifying tests and
implementation code simultaneously, ensuring the test remains an objective baseline.
With these constraints in place, the Red, Blue, and Green triad dynamically adapts the
primary agent's behaviour at runtime across three distinct phases:
• The Planner Phase: When a primary agent designs a workflow, a specialised threat-
modelling skill helps it evaluate the plan, identifying logical flaws and policy violations
before the agent begins active execution.
• The Evaluator Phase: The Evaluator quorum reviews the proposed execution trace while
the Agent Defender (Blue) simultaneously verifies the AgBOM and monitors the semantic
context for intent drift.
• The Executor Phase: As the Executor performs the downscoped action, the Agent Fixer
(Green) monitors the real-world tool execution, ready to instantly orchestrate a stateful
quarantine or trigger an auto-refactoring loop if the agent encounters an error or trips a
security constraint.
To ensure these automated defence mechanisms can successfully intervene, the security
triad requires an unimpeded, granular view into the agent's internal reasoning. An agentic
security operation is entirely blind if it only looks at the final code output. We must shift our
focus from observing the host infrastructure to observing the agent's "mind," creating an
immutable audit trail that maps exactly how a fuzzy intent translates into a real-world action.
May 2026 23
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Observability: Auditing the Agent's Mind (Pillar 6 & 7)
To effectively secure and evaluate a vibe-coded agent, we must acknowledge a fundamental
rule: you cannot secure what you cannot see. In traditional microservices, an HTTP 200 OK
status indicates a successful operation. However, in an agentic system, a "success" status
might merely mask a scenario where the agent's internal logic has quietly cascaded into a
hallucination loop. This introduces the critical risk of Denial of Wallet (DoW) attacks, where
adversaries intentionally trigger infinite, computationally expensive API loops to deliberately
bankrupt the organisation's cloud and LLM billing accounts.
Observability is no longer merely an operational concern for uptime and latency; it is a strict
security requirement to illuminate the "glass box" of non-deterministic logic.
Tracing the "Vibe Trajectory" and Content Scanning
To answer the critical question, "Why did an agent do that?", security teams must construct a
unified, chronological lens to view the agent's cognitive steps. By utilising standard telemetry
frameworks like OpenTelemetry, enterprises can aggregate diverse signals—API calls, tool
inputs/outputs, RAG retrievals, and token latency—into a complete Vibe Trajectory.
Tracking this trajectory requires logging the massive cognitive leap from the user's initial
prompt to the compiled Abstract Syntax Tree (AST). To fortify this trace, organisations must
pair traditional logging with Centralised Content Scanning, explicitly designed to inspect all
dynamic code snippets or scripts retrieved by the agent at runtime. This trace securely binds
the agent's internal reasoning loop to its physical actions, supporting rigorous third-party
security audits.
May 2026 24
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Measuring Intent Drift and Trust Decay
As a vibe-coded agent dynamically generates logic and pulls in new tools, its security
perimeter constantly fluctuates, making static asset inventories (SBOMs) instantly stale.
Instead, observability platforms must monitor a Runtime Agent Bill of Materials (AgBOM)—a
living document that maps the agent's active blast radius at any given millisecond.
Because trust in an autonomous system is a degradable asset, the architecture continuously
monitors for Intent Drift. The principle of Trust Decay dictates that trust is lost when an
agent's internal chain of thought pursues sub-goals that diverge from the original human
vibe. For instance, a simple prompt to "optimise the database query" might maliciously drift
into the agent attempting to download a new, unauthorised indexing library.
Checkpoints and Stateful Circuit Breakers
To prevent destructive actions when this drift occurs, the observability pillar must proactively
manage state. Before an agent executes any codebase modifications, the system must
generate a version control checkpoint.
As Agent Behavioural Analytics evaluate the Vibe Trajectory against the AgBOM, any
detected instability instantly penalises the dynamic Agent Trust Score. If this score drops
below a pre-defined threshold, an automated "circuit breaker" is tripped. The environment
uses the version control checkpoint to immediately roll back changes, gracefully revoking
tool access and freezing the agent's autonomous execution without corrupting connected
APIs, preserving the environment state for forensic analysis.
May 2026 25
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Security Recap
For developers operationalising these concepts, securing a vibe-coded architecture relies on
abandoning implicit trust and implementing the following practical baseline:
• Sandbox the Vibe Loop: Always execute dynamically generated scripts within kernel-
level, network-isolated sandboxes to contain the blast radius. Embed up-to-date Software
Composition Analysis (SCA) to actively scan for hallucinated or vulnerable dependencies
before the code reaches production.
• Shift the Perimeter Left: Enforce the use of trusted sources and verified internal
registries. While blocking insecure generation at the IDE level provides an advisory first
step, rely on strict deterministic checks at multiple points in the CI/CD pipeline to intercept
vulnerable or malicious agent logic before deployment.
• Enforce Zero Ambient Authority: Never grant an agent a "Global Key". Restrict
access by mandating delegated user identities and Just-In-Time (JIT) hyper-restricted
tokens that expire the moment a task concludes. For high-stakes actions, replace blind
approval buttons with a mandatory "Vibe Diff" to ensure developers understand the
generated logic.
• Deploy Agentic SecOps: Continuously stress-test your architecture by deploying Virtual
Red-Teaming Agents to inject "Adversarial Vibes". Leverage Agent Behavioural Analytics to
monitor the dynamic Runtime AgBOM, while empowering the Green Team to auto-refactor
vulnerabilities on the fly.
• Trace the Execution Trajectory: Log the agent's API calls, tool inputs, and reasoning
steps. Security teams must continuously monitor these execution logs to detect
unexpected behaviour and utilise version control checkpoints to revert access if the agent
drifts from its intended task.
May 2026 26
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Implementing these security controls helps our vibe-coded agents operate safely within a
secure, well-governed perimeter. However, a secure agent is not inherently an effective one.
Security ensures the agent does not do anything malicious or unauthorised, but how do we
definitively prove it actually achieved the user's nuanced intent?
To truly operationalise these agents, we must move beyond securing the perimeter and open
the "glass box" to measure the quality, efficiency, and alignment of their internal reasoning.
This brings us to the crucial next phase of the pipeline: Agent Evaluation.
Evaluation: Orchestrating Quality in
Intent-Driven Agentic Systems
The previous sections covered the security controls that constrain what a vibe-coded agent
can do.
Those controls don't answer the question the developer actually has: did the agent build
what I asked for, and is it any good? A vibe-coded agent can pass every security check and
still misread the developer's intent, ignore the project's conventions, or break an unrelated
feature. Security tells you the agent stayed inside the boundary; evaluation tells you whether
what happened inside that boundary is worth shipping.
The following sections are structured around three questions: why vibe coding evaluation
is different from evaluating other software, what to evaluate, and how to evaluate it. The
diagram below summarizes each layer; the rest of the whitepaper expands them.
May 2026 27
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Figure 2: The vibe coding agent evaluation framework
Two areas sit deliberately outside the scope of this framework, both warranting dedicated
treatment: subjective evaluation of non-verifiable outputs, where quality is defined by
user or enterprise preferences rather than ground truth; and the feedback loop from user
corrections back into the model, the harness, or the eval suite to drive improvement.
Why evaluating vibe coding agents is different
Evaluating vibe coding agents is not the same problem as evaluating deterministic software,
and it's not the same problem as evaluating a customer-service agent or a research agent
either.
May 2026 28
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Three things make it unique:
• The Underspecification Gap (There is no spec). Traditional software testing operates
on the unyielding assumption that a complete, rigid specification exists before a single
line of code is evaluated. Vibe coding is the exact opposite: the user’s natural language
prompt is inherently underspecified. "Make the dashboard load faster" is not a test
case. The prompt relies entirely on the foundation model's latent knowledge, aesthetic
judgment, and domain expertise to fill in the operational gaps. The first job of evaluation is
to determine whether the agent successfully bridged this gap and reconstructed the right
unstated spec.
• The user often cannot validate the output. Non-technical users cannot review 600 lines
of code line by line. Experienced engineers cannot either, in real time. The gap between
"the agent thinks it succeeded" and "the code is actually correct" is wider here than in any
other agent category, and closing that gap is the central work of evaluation.
• The session is iterative and the codebase is state. Each turn modifies real files. Bad
early decisions compound. Evaluation has to cover not just turn-level decisions but
the full arc of a multi-turn conversation, on a living codebase with its own conventions,
dependencies, and history.
These three constraints shape every dimension, method, and tip that follows.
What to Evaluate
Vibe coding agent evaluation breaks into seven dimensions, in two groups. User-facing
dimensions are what the developer experiences directly. Internal dimensions describe
what the agent does invisibly to the user. In addition, Safety and responsible AI is
transversal, it intersects multiple dimensions (code vulnerabilities, refusal behaviour, content
safety, IP exposure) and has to be evaluated alongside each of them.
May 2026 29
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Figure 3: Evaluation dimensions for vibe coding agents
1. Intent satisfaction. Did the agent build what the user meant, not just what they said? The
hardest dimension to evaluate because the intent is unstated, ambiguous, and often shifts
mid-session. Intent satisfaction is what the user ultimately judges the agent on.
2. Functional correctness. Does the code build, run, and pass tests? The floor, not the
ceiling. Easy to measure but easy to game: tests can be deleted or mocked to make red
turn green without fixing anything.
3. Visual and behavioural correctness. For agents that produce web apps or UI, the
artifact is the rendered output, not the code. Code-level metrics miss the point entirely.
The page either looks right and behaves right, or it doesn't.
May 2026 30
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
4. Cost and efficiency. Token spend, wall-clock latency, tool-call count, and iteration count,
how many corrections did the user have to issue before the agent converged? An agent
that lands the right diff in 1 turn is a different product from one that needs 8 corrections.
5. Code quality and convention matching. Does the code match the project's idioms,
patterns, and conventions? A diff that passes tests but violates the codebase's style is a
vibe-coding failure even when locally correct.
6. Trajectory quality. Did the agent take a sensible path: read the related files first,
sequence the edits coherently, pick the right tool or skill at each step? Correct output
produced by bad reasoning is a fragile success.
7. Self-repair behaviour. When the build fails, the test breaks, or the user says "no, not
like that," does the agent recover or compound the failure? Recovery quality compounds
across a multi-turn session.
These dimensions are not independent. For instance, stronger trajectory quality (dimension
6) tends to mean stronger functional correctness (dimension 2), which is a prerequisite for
intent satisfaction (dimension 1).
How to evaluate
The seven dimensions are not all measurable the same way. No single method covers
everything, so production pipelines combine several. The figure below summarizes the
evaluation methods and the dimensions each is recommended for; the rest of the section
describes each in detail.
May 2026 31
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Figure 4: Evaluation methods and recommended dimensions
Automated functional testing. Run the build, the test suite, and the linters on the agent's
output. The standard tooling does most of the work here, pytest, jest, eslint, mypy, plugged
into the project's CI pipeline. This is the cheapest signal available, recommended for
functional correctness (dimension 2) and the rule-checkable parts of code quality (dimension
5).
Security and safety evaluation. Combine static security analysis on the generated code
with adversarial probing for refusal behaviour. This is cross-cutting, it scores safety and
responsible AI alongside the other dimensions, not as a separate gate. The tooling splits
in two: static scanners like Snyk and Semgrep find vulnerabilities, git-secrets catches
credential leaks, and scripted red-team suites test whether the agent refuses clearly harmful
requests.
May 2026 32
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
LLM-as-judge and Agent-as-judge. Use a model to score outputs against rubrics.
Recommended for the dimensions where rules don't quite capture the right answer, intent
satisfaction (dimension 1), code quality and style (dimension 5), and trajectory quality
(dimension 6). In practice that means Gemini scoring an output against the original user
prompt, or an agent-as-judge inspecting the trace for plan coherence.
Browser-based testing. Run multi-step workflows against the deployed app and observe
what happens. Recommended for visual and behavioural correctness (dimension 3) on UI-
producing agents. The techniques are well-established in software testing: Playwright scripts
that interact with the rendered UI, screenshot comparison against a reference.
Trajectory inspection. Analyze the agent's reasoning, tool calls, skill invocations, and
retrievals. Recommended for the internal dimensions, trajectory quality (dimension 6) and
self-repair behaviour (dimension 7). The substrate is OpenTelemetry traces with span-level
tool-call data, surfaced through trace-replay tools that bind each model invocation to the
actions that followed.
Human review. Sample sessions for direct review by qualified reviewers. Recommended
for intent satisfaction (dimension 1, where humans are the only ground truth), code quality
(dimension 5, the traditional domain of code review), and safety and responsible AI calls
that need nuanced judgment. Doesn't scale; mainly used to calibrate the other methods. In
practice that means structured annotation by senior engineers on review queues filled by
online sampling.
Online evaluation. Sample live production traffic and score it against the same rubrics
used in offline eval. Covers all dimensions at sample rate. The trick is sampling well: a flat 1%
misses the long tail, so bias toward high-cost sessions, sessions with many corrections, and
sessions the user abandoned.
May 2026 33
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Standardised Benchmarks & Kaggle Agent Exams
While custom evaluation frameworks handle the open-ended nature of vibe coding,
standardised testing isolates specific cognitive capabilities from the noise of custom
enterprise environments. They provide the empirical baseline required to trust a
non-deterministic system.
• The Role of Standardised Testing: Benchmarks compare your agent against the field
on shared task sets. Vibe Code Bench evaluates zero-to-one web app generation, SWE-
bench Verified evaluates code changes on real GitHub repos, and LiveCodeBench gives a
contamination-resistant signal for code generation.
• Kaggle Agent Exams (SAE) and Zero-Setup Evaluation: Addressing the historically
heavy infrastructure burden required to run these benchmarks, the Kaggle Standardised
Agent Exams (SAE) represent a massive shift toward "zero-setup" autonomous evaluation.
Deployed as a lightweight API integration via a SKILL.md file, SAE allows an agent to
autonomously register itself with Kaggle, fetch exam questions, execute the multi-step
logic within its own sandboxed environment, and instantly publish its score to a live public
leaderboard. It acts as a rigorous, friction-free test of an agent's multi-hop reasoning and
adversarial safety under pressure.
• Tradeoffs: Overfitting vs. Real-World Intent: Despite their immense utility, an over-
reliance on standardised benchmarks introduces a severe tradeoff: benchmark overfitting.
Agents can be hyper-optimized to achieve top-tier scores on static Kaggle datasets but
fail catastrophically when exposed to the messy, contradictory realities of human intent
in production. While a high score on SWE-bench proves an agent can navigate a highly
structured Python repository, it provides zero guarantees that the agent possesses the
aesthetic judgment required to "vibe code" a consumer-facing application. Standardised
exams should be used strictly for cognitive calibration, not as a replacement for evaluating
custom intent.
May 2026 34
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Observability: The Prerequisite for Evaluation
To evaluate an agent's internal reasoning, developers must possess the capability to see it.
Observability is the absolute prerequisite for Glass Box evaluation; without it, agent failures
appear as inexplicable monolithic events.
• Tracing the Thought: Modern agent observability relies on OpenTelemetry to capture
non-deterministic flows. agent.session spans capture the entire task duration, agent.
think spans record the internal reasoning and prompting cycle prior to action, and
agent.tool spans log the specific arguments and latencies of environmental interactions.
• Tracking Costs: Observability provides granular data to calculate true operational
costs. By aggregating span attributes, teams can precisely measure token consumption,
inference latency, and the cost of self-repair loops.
• Dynamic Tail-Based Sampling: Capturing 100% of traces in production quickly
overwhelms storage budgets. Tail-based dynamic sampling allows the collector to
evaluate the full trace after completion, dropping routine successes while retaining traces
containing errors or excessive self-repair loops.
Applied tips for vibe-coding agent evaluation
Use the session prefix as the intent rubric
Vibe coding has no spec to test against, the user’s intent, is unstated and evolves across
turns. The closest thing to a spec is the first one or two user messages. Treat them as the
rubric: derive evaluation criteria automatically from the session prefix, then score every
subsequent turn against them. This is the only practical way to evaluate dimension 1 (intent
satisfaction) at scale.
May 2026 35
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Python
from google import genai
client = genai.Client(vertexai=True, project="...", location="us-central1")
# Derive criteria from the user's opening turns
opening = " ".join(session.user_messages[:2])
criteria = client.models.generate_content(
model="gemini-3-pro",
contents=f"Produce 3-5 acceptance criteria for: {opening}. Return JSON.",
).parsed["criteria"]
# Score every agent turn against the derived criteria
score = client.models.generate_content(
model="gemini-3-pro",
contents=f"Does this output satisfy {criteria}? Score 1-5 with rationale."
f"Output: {agent_response}",
).parsed
Snippet 1: Deriving intent satisfaction acceptance criteria from a session prefix.
Judge the rendered artifact, not the code.
In vibe coding the user judges the output, not the diff. A multimodal model looking at the
rendered page catches problems that code-level evaluation misses entirely: layout broken
on mobile, contrast too low for accessibility, button states wrong. Pair this with Playwright
assertions from Section 5, the judge catches visual and design issues, the assertions catch
broken interactivity.
May 2026 36
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Python
from google import genai
from google.genai import types
client = genai.Client(vertexai=True, project="...", location="...")
result = client.models.generate_content(
model="gemini-3-pro",
contents=[
"Score this rendered web app against the spec on layout_match, styling, "
"and interactive_correctness (1-5 each). Return JSON.",
user_spec,
types.Part.from_bytes(data=screenshot_bytes, mime_type="image/png"),
],
)
Snippet 2: Multimodal evaluation of a rendered web application's layout and interactive correctness.
Evaluate session convergence, not turn-level accuracy.
A vibe-coding session is multi-turn by construction. The relevant question is not “was turn 4
correct?” but “did the user converge on something they wanted?” Sessions that converge
in few turns are the success cases. Sessions abandoned mid-flow are the most informative
failures, far more than turn-level errors. Cloud Trace exposes a vibe-coding session,
instrumented through ADK and Agent Engine, as a single trace tree.
May 2026 37
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Python
from google.cloud import trace_v2
trace = trace_v2.TraceServiceClient().get_trace(
name=f"projects/{project}/traces/{session_id}"
)
def session_outcome(trace):
return {
"converged": trace.last_turn.user_signal == "satisfied",
"turns_to_converge": trace.user_correction_count,
"abandoned": trace.last_user_action == "close",
"cost_to_converge": trace.total_token_cost_usd,
}
Snippet 3: Tracking multi-turn session convergence and calculating total token cost via Google Cloud Trace.
Mine user corrections as labeled failure data.
Every “no, not like that” from the user is a labeled failure example, and vibe coding produces
these in volume. Cluster them and the systematic gaps in the agent become visible, much
faster than building a synthetic failure benchmark.
May 2026 38
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Python
from google import genai
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
client = genai.Client(vertexai=True, project="...", location="...")
corrections = [t.user_message for trace in traces for t in trace.turns
if t.is_correction]
emb = client.models.embed_content(
model="text-embedding-005",
contents=corrections,
)
vectors = [e.values for e in emb.embeddings]
clusters = KMeans(n_clusters=8).fit(vectors)
# Clusters.labels_ is the prioritized list of failure modes for the next iteration
Snippet 4: Clustering user corrections into prioritized failure mode categories.
May 2026 39
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Conclusion
The transition from syntax to intent is not a future prediction; it is the immediate
reality of software development. As of 2026, the bottlenecks in software creation have
fundamentally shifted. We are no longer waiting on human hands to type boilerplate; we
are waiting on human minds to define the boundaries, evaluate the outputs, and secure the
execution environment.
Moving from casual vibe coding to disciplined agentic engineering requires abandoning
implicit trust. A raw AI model is merely an engine; it only becomes an enterprise-ready agent
when wrapped in a robust harness. By implementing the 7-Pillar Security Architecture—
enforcing strict sandboxing, contextual ABAC, and agentic Red/Blue/Green teaming—
organisations can safely contain the blast radius of autonomous actions.
However, security alone only proves the agent did no harm. By pairing these security controls
with a rigorous Evaluation Framework—measuring everything from intent satisfaction and
trajectory quality to visual correctness—engineering leaders can confidently prove the agent
actually delivered value.
Generation is largely a solved problem. Verification, security, and architectural judgment are
the new craft. The teams that thrive in this new era will be those that embrace AI as a high-
velocity implementation engine, while maintaining the rigorous discipline required to produce
software the world can actually depend on.
May 2026 40
Vibe Coding Agent Security and Evaluation
Endnotes
1. DORA. "State of AI-assisted Software Development." 2025.
https://dora.dev/research/2025/
2. Wiz Research. "From Prompts to Production: The Technical Guide to Secure Vibe Coding." 2026.
https://www.wiz.io/lp/the-technical-guide-to-secure-vibe-coding
3. Mandiant. "AI risk and resilience: A Mandiant special report." 2026.
https://cloud.google.com/security/resources/ai-risk-and-resilience
4. Mandiant. "M-Trends 2026 Executive Edition." 2026.
https://services.google.com/fh/files/misc/m-trends-2026-executive-edition-en.pdf
5. Wiz Research. "From Prompts to Production: The Technical Guide to Secure Vibe Coding." 2026.
https://www.wiz.io/lp/the-technical-guide-to-secure-vibe-coding
6. Knostic, "AI Coding Agent Security: Threat Models and Protection Strategies"
May 2026 41